THE GRECIAN HISTORY, FROM THE EARLIEST STATE TO THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER THE
GREAT.

By DR. GOLDSMITH.

LONDON, Printed for J. and F. RIVINGTON, T. LONGMAN, G. KEARSLEY, W. GRIFFIN,
G. ROBINSON, R. BALDWIN, W. GOLDSMITH, T. CADELL, and T. EVANS in the Strand.
MDCCLXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Applause bestowed on the ROMAN HISTORY, written by Dr. GOLDSMITH, induced
that Gentleman to complete his Plan, by writing a HISTORY OF GREECE.

The Work was printed off when the Republic of Letters was deprived of one of
its brightest Ornaments. Since the Author's Decease, the Work has been perused
by several of his learned Friends, who are of Opinion, that it has an equal
Claim to that Approbation which the ROMAN HISTORY received from the Public.

THE HISTORY OF GREECE.
CHAP. I. Of the earliest State of GREECE.
THE first notices we have of every country are fabulous and uncertain. Among
an unenlightened people every imposture is likely to take place, for ignorance
is the parent of credulity. Nothing therefore which the Greeks have transmitted
to us concerning their earliest state can be relied on. Poets were the first
who began to record the actions of their countrymen, and it is a part of their
art to strike the imagination even at the expense of probability. For this
reason, in the earliest accounts of Greece we are presented with the
machinations of gods and demigods, the adventures of heroes and giants, the
ravages of monsters and dragons, and all the potency of charms and
enchantments. Man, plain historical man, seems to have no share in the picture,
and while the reader wanders through the most delightful scenes the imagination
can offer, he is scarce once presented with the actions of such a being as
himself.

It would be vain therefore, and beside the present purpose, to give an
historical air to accounts which were never meant to be transmitted as true.
Some writers indeed have laboriously undertaken to separate the truth from the
fable, and to give us an unbroken narrative from the first dawning of tradition
to the display of undoubted history; they have levelled down all mythology to
their own apprehensions, every fable is made to look with an air of
probability, instead of a golden fleece Jason goes in pursuit of a great
treasure; instead of destroying a chimera, Bellerophon reclaims a mountain;
instead of an hydra, Hercules overcomes a robber.

Thus the fanciful pictures of a strong imagination are taught to assume a
serious severity, and tend to deceive the reader still more by offering in the
garb of truth what had been only meant to delight and allure him.

The fabulous age, therefore, of Greece must have no place in history; it is
now too late to separate these parts which may have a real foundation in nature
from those which owe their existence wholly to the imagination. There are no
traces left to guide us in that intricate pursuit, the dews of the morning are
past, and it is vain to attempt continuing the chase in meridian splendour. It
will be sufficient therefore for us to observe, that Greece, like most other
countries of whose origin we have any notice, was at first divided into a
number of petty states, each commanded by its own sovereign. Ancient Greece,
which is now the south part of Turkey in Europe, was bounded on the east by the
Egean sea, now called the Archipelago; on the south by the Cretan or Candian
sea; on the west by the Ionian sea; and on the north by Illyria and Thrace. Of
such very narrow extent, and so very contemptible with regard to territory was
that country which gave birth to all the arts of war and peace, which produced
the greatest generals, philosophers, poets, painters, architects and statuaries
that the world ever boasted, which overcame the most powerful monarchs, and
dispersed the most numerous armies that ever were brought into the field, and
at last became the instructor of all mankind.

It is said in scripture that Javan, the son of Japeth, was the father of all
these nations that went under the general denomination of Greeks. Of his four
sons, Elisha, or Ellas is said to have given name to the (...), a general name
by which the Greeks were known. Tharsis, the second son, is thought to have
settled in Achaia; Chittim settled in Macedonia; and Dodanim, the fourth, son
in Thessaly and Epirus. How they portioned out the country, what revolutions
they experienced, or what wars they maintained are utterly unknown, and indeed
the history of petty barbarous states, if known, would hardly recompense the
trouble of enquiry. In those early times, kingdoms were but inconsiderable: a
single city with a few leagues of land was often honored with that magnificent
appellation; it would therefore embarrass history to enter into the domestic
privacy of every little state, as it would be rather a subject for the
oeconomist than the politician. It will suffice to observe, that Sicyon is said
to be the most ancient kingdom of Greece. The beginning of this petty
sovereignty is placed by historians in the year of the world one thousand nine
hundred and fifteen, before Jesus Christ two thousand eighty-nine, and before
the first Olympiad one thousand three hundred and thirteen. The first king was
Aegialeus. Its duration is said to have been a thousand years.

The kingdom of Argos, in Peloponesus, began a thousand and eighty years before
the first Olympiad, in the time of Abraham. A. M. 2148.
The first king was Inachus.

The kingdom of Mycaenae succeeded. The seat of government was translated
thither from Argos by Perseus, the grandson of Acrisius, the last king of that
country, who Perseus unfortunately slew. The kings who reigned at Mycaenae
after Perseus, were Electryon, Sthenelus, and Eurystheus; the latter of whom
was driven out by the Heraclidae, or the descendants of Hercules, who made
themselves masters of Peloponnesus.

The kingdom of Athens was first founded by Cecrops, an Egyptian. A. M. 2448.
This prince having settled in Attica, divided the whole country subject to him
into twelve districts, and also established a court for judging causes,
entitled the Areopagus. Amphictyon, the third king of Athens, procured a
confederacy among the twelve states of Greece, which assembled twice a year at
Thermopylae, there to offer up common sacrifices, and to consult for the common
interest of the association. Theseus, one of the succeeding kings of this
state, united the twelve boroughs of Cecrops into one city. Codrus was the last
of this line who devoted himself to death for his people. The Heraclidae having
made an irruption as far as the gates of Athens, the oracle declared, that they
should be conquerors whose king should fall in this contest. To take the
earliest advantage, therefore, of this answer, Codrus disguised himself in the
habit of a peasant, and provoking one of the enemies soldiers, was killed by
him. Whereupon, the Athenians sent an herald to demand the body of their king,
which message struck such a damp into the enemy, that they departed without
striking another blow. After Codrus the title of king was extinguished among
the Athenians. Medon, his son, was set at the head of the commonwealth, with
the title of Archon, which signifies chief governor. The first of this
denomination had their places for life, but the Athenians growing weary of a
government which represt their love of freedom, they abridged the terms of the
archon's power to ten years, and at last made the office elective every year.

The kingdom of Thebes was first founded by Cadmus. A. M. 2549.
This hero coming by sea from the coast of Phoenicia, settled in that part of
the country which was afterward called Baeotia. He there built the city of
Thebes, which from his own name he called Cadmaea, and there fixed his seat of
power and dominion. The adventures of his unhappy posterity, Laius, Jocasta,
Oedipus, Eteocles, and Polynices, make a shining figure among the poetical
fictions of that period.

The kingdom of Sparta, or Lacedaemon, is supposed to be first instituted by
Leliae. Helena, the tenth in succession from this monarch, is equally famous
for her beauty and infidelity. She had not lived above three years with her
husband, Menelaus, before she was carried off by Paris, the son of Priam king
of Troy. This seems to be the first occasion in which the Greeks united in one
common cause. The Greeks took Troy after a ten years siege, much about the time
that Jeptha was the judge in Israel.

A. M. 2820.
Corinth began later than the other cities abovementioned to be formed into a
state, or to be governed by its kings. It was at first subject to Argos and
Mycaenae, but Sisiphus, the son of Aeolus, made himself master of it; A. M.
2628.
and when his descendants were dispossessed, Bachis assumed the reins of power.
The government after this became aristocratical, a chief magistrate being
annually chosen by the name of Prytanni. At last Cypselus having gained the
people, usurped the supreme authority, which he transmitted to his son
Periander, who was ranked among the seven wise men of Greece, from the love he
bore to learning, and his encouragement of its professors.

The kingdom of Macedonia was first governed by Caranus, descended from
Hercules, and subsisted from his time till the defeat of Perseus by the Romans,
a space of six hundred and twenty-six years.

Such is the picture Greece offers in its earliest infancy. A combination of
little states, each governed by its respective sovereign, yet all uniting for
their mutual safety and general advantage. Still, however, their intestine
contentions were carried on with great animosity; and, as it happens in all
petty states under the dominion of a single commander, the jealousies of the
princes were a continual cause of discord. From this distressful situation,
those states, by degrees, began to emerge: a different spirit began to seize
the people, and, sick of the contentions of their princes, they desired to be
free. A spirit of liberty prevailed all over Greece, and a general change of
government was effected in every part of the country except in Macedonia. Thus
monarchy gave way to a republican government, which, however, was diversified
into as many various forms as there were different cities, according to the
different genius and peculiar character of each people.

All these cities, though seemingly different from each other in their laws and
interests, were united with each other by one common language, one religion,
and a national pride that taught them to consider all other nations as
barbarous and feeble. Even Egypt itself, from whence they had derived many of
their arts and institutions, was considered in a very subordinate light, and
rather as an half barbarous predecessor, than an enlightened rival.

To make this union among the states of Greece still stronger, there were games
instituted in different parts of the country, with rewards for excellence in
every pursuit. These sports were instituted for very serious and useful
purposes; they afforded an opportunity for the several states meeting together;
they gave them a greater zeal for their common religion; they exercised the
youth for the purposes of war, and increased that vigor and activity which was
then of the utmost importance in deciding the fate of a battle.

But their chief bond of union arose from the council of the Amphictyons, which
was instituted by Amphictyon, king of Athens, as is already mentioned, and was
appointed to be held twice a year at Thermopylae, to deliberate for the general
good of those states of whose deputies it was composed. The states who sent
deputies to this council, were twelve, namely, the Thessalians, the Thebans,
the Dorians, the Ionians, the Perhaabeans, the Magnates, the Locrians, the
Oetans, the Pthiotes, the Maleans, the Phocians, and the Dolopians. Each of
those cities which had a right to assist at the Amphictyonic council, was
obliged to send two deputies to every meeting. The one was entitled the
Hieromnemon, who took care of the interests of religion; the other was called
the Pylagoras, and had in charge the civil interests of his community. Each of
these deputies, however, differing in their functions, enjoyed an equal power
of determining all affairs relative to the general interests of Greece. But,
although the number of deputies seems to have been settled originally so as to
answer the number of votes which each city was allowed, yet in process of time,
on some extraordinary occasions, the principal cities assumed a power of
sending more than one Pylagoras to assist in a critical emergency, or to serve
the purposes of a faction. When the deputies, thus appointed, appeared to
execute their commission, after offering up sacrifices to Apollo, Diana,
Latona, and Minerva, they took an oath, implying, that they would never subvert
any city of the Amphictyons, never stop the course of waters either in war or
peace, and that they would oppose any attempts to lessen the reverence and
authority of the gods, to whom they had paid their adoration. Thus, all
offenses against religion, all instances of impiety and profanation, all
contests between the Grecian states and cities came under the particular
cognizance of the Amphictyons, who had a right to determine, to impose fines,
and even to levy forces, and to make war against those who offered to rebel
against their sovereign authority.

These different motives to confederacy united the Greeks for a time into a
body of great power, and greater emulation. By this association, a country not
half so large as England, was able to dispute the empire of the earth with the
most powerful monarchs of the world. By this association, they not only made
head against the numerous armies of Persia, but dispersed, routed and destroyed
them, reducing their pride so low, as to make them submit to conditions of
peace as shameful to the conquered as glorious to the conquerors. But among all
the cities of Greece, there were two that by their merit, their valor, and
their wisdom, particularly distinguished themselves from the rest: these were
Athens and Lacedaemon. As these cities served as an example of bravery or
learning to the rest, and as the chief burden of every foreign war devolved
upon them, it will be proper to enter into their particular history with
greater minuteness, and to give the reader some idea of the genius, character,
manners, and government of their respective inhabitants.

CHAP. II. Of the Government of SPARTA, and the Laws of LYCURGUS.
ALTHOUGH the kingdom of Lacedaemon was not so considerable as that of Athens,
yet as it was of much earlier institution, it demands our first attention.
Lacedaemon, as observed above, was in the beginning governed by kings, of which
thirteen held the reins of power in succession, of the race of the Pelopidae.
As during this dark interval there were no fixed laws to limit the prerogative,
nor no ideas of true government among the people, it does not appear that there
were any considerable encroachments made either on the side of the king or that
of the people. Under the race of the Heraclidae, who succeeded, instead of one
king, the people admitted two, who governed with equal authority. The cause of
this change seems to have sprung from a very particular accident; for
Aristodemus dying, left two sons, Eurysthenes and Procles, twins, so much
alike, that it was hardly possible to distinguish them asunder. From hence the
hint was taken by the mother of fixing the crown upon both; so that when the
Spartans came for a king, she was either unwilling or unable to decide which of
them was firstborn, or which had the justest pretensions. This form of
government continued for several succeeding centuries, and though the one was
almost ever at variance with his associate on the throne, yet the government
remained entire.

It was during this succession that slavery was first instituted in Sparta.
Erysthenes and Procles having granted the countrymen of Sparta the same
privileges with the citizens, Agis reversed what his predecessors had done in
favor of the peasants, and imposed a tribute upon them. The Helotes were the
only people that would not acquiesce in this impost, but rose in rebellion to
vindicate their rights: the citizens however prevailed, the Helotes were
subdued and made prisoners of war. As a still greater punishment, they and
their posterity were condemned to perpetual slavery; and, to increase their
miseries still more, all other slaves were called by the general name of
Helotes.

It would appear from hence that this little state was governed with turbulence
and oppression, and required the curb of severe laws and rigorous discipline.
These severities and rigorous discipline were at last imposed upon it by
Lycurgus, one of the first and most extraordinary legislators that ever
appeared among mankind. There is perhaps nothing more remarkable in profane
history, yet nothing so well attested, as what relates to the laws and
government of Lycurgus. What indeed can be more amazing than to behold a
mutinous and savage race of mankind yielding submission to laws that controuled
every sensual pleasure and every private affection; to behold them give up, for
the good of the state, all the comforts and conveniences of private life, and
making a state of domestic privacy more severe and terrible than the most
painful campaigns and the most warlike duties. Yet all this was effected by the
perseverance and authority of a single legislator, who gave the first lessons
of hard resignation in his own generous example.

Lycurgus was the son of Eunomus, one of the two kings who reigned together in
Sparta. The two kings dying without apparent issue, the right of succession
rested in Lycurgus, who accordingly took the administration upon him. But an
unexpected event came to interrupt his promotion; for the queen his
sister-in-law proving with child, his right became doubtful. A man of less
probity would have used every precaution to secure himself upon the throne, and
a proposal which was made him by the queen seemed to secure his pretensions.
She offered to destroy the birth, upon condition that he would marry her, and
take her into a share of power. Lycurgus wisely smothered his resentment at so
unnatural a proposal, and fearful that she might use means to put her project
in execution, assured her that as soon as the child was born he would take upon
himself to remove it out of the way. Accordingly she was delivered of a boy,
which Lycurgus commanded should be brought to him, as he was at supper with the
magistrates; to them he presented the child as their king, and to testify his
own and the people's joy, gave him the name of Charilaus. Thus Lycurgus
sacrificed his ambition to his duty; and still more, continued his regency, not
as king but governor. However, dreading the resentment of the queen, and
finding the state in great disorder, he resolved by traveling to avoid the
dangers of the one, and to procure a remedy for the defects of the other.

Thus resolving to make himself acquainted with all the improvements of other
nations, and to consult the most experienced persons he could meet with in the
art of government, he began with the island of Crete, whose hard and severe
laws were very much admired. In this island the handicraft trades were brought
to some degree of perfection. There they wrought in copper and iron, and made
armor, in which they danced with a confused noise of bells at the sacrifices
of their gods. It was from them that the art of navigation was first known in
Greece, and from them many legislators derived the principles of their
respective institutions.

From Crete Lycurgus passed over into Asia, where he still found new
information, and is said to have first made the discovery of the works of
Homer. From thence he went into Egypt, and is said by some to have had
conserences with the gymnosophists of India. But whilst thus employed abroad,
his presence began to be greatly wanted at home. All parties conspired to wish
his coming, and many messages were sent to hasten his return. The kings
themselves importuned him to that effect, and let him know, that the people
were arrived at such a pitch of disorder that nothing but his authority could
control their licentiousness. In fact, every thing tended to the unavoidable
destruction of the state, and nothing but his presence was wished to check its
increasing dissolution.

Lycurgus, at length persuaded to return, found the people wearied out with
their own importunities, and ready to receive any new impressions he might
attempt. Wherefore the corruption being general, he found it necessary to
change the whole form of the government; sensible that a few particular laws
would produce no great effect. But considering the efficacy of religion in
promoting every new institution, he went first to consult the oracle of Apollo
at Delphos, where he met a reception that might flatter his highest ambition,
for he was saluted by the priestless as a friend of the gods, and rather as a
god than man. As to his new institution also, he was told that the gods heard
his prayers, and that the commonwealth he was going to establish would be the
most excellent and durable upon earth.

Thus encouraged, on his return to Sparta, Lycurgus first communicated his
designs to his particular friends, and then by degrees gained over the leading
men to his party, until things being ripe for a change, he ordered thirty of
the principal men to appear armed in the marketplace. Charilaus, who was at
that time king, seemed at first willing to oppose this revolution, but being
intimidated by a superlor force, he took shelter in the temple of Minerva;
where, being prevailed upon by his subjects, and being also of a flexible
temper, he came forth and joined the confederacy. The people soon acquiesced
under a set of institutions which were evidently calulated for their
improvement, and gladly acknowledged submission to laws which leaned with equal
weight upon every rank of society.

To continue the KINGS still with a shadow of power, he confirmed them in their
right of succession as before, but diminished their authority by instituting a
senate, which was to serve as a counterpoise between the prerogative and the
people. They still, however, had all their former marks of outward dignity and
respect. They had the chief seats in every public assembly; in voting they were
allowed first to give their opinion; they received ambassadors and strangers,
and overlooked public buildings and highways. In the field they were possessed
of greater power, they conducted the armies of the state, and were attended by
judges, field-deputies, and a general of the horse. However, they were not
entirely at liberty even in war, as they received their orders from the senate,
which, though for the most part discretionary, yet they were sometimes forced
to march against the enemy, or to return home when they least desired to
retreat.

The government hitherto had been unsteady, tending at one time time toward
despotism, at another to democracy, but the SENATE instituted by Lycurgus
served as a check upon both, and kept the state balanced in tranquillity. This
body, which was composed of twenty-eight members, founded their chief policy in
siding with the kings when the people were grasping at too much power; and, on
the other hand, in espousing the interests of the people whenever the kings
attempted to carry their authority too far. The senators, who were composed of
those who assisted Lycurgus in his designs, as well as of several of the
citizens remarkable for their private virtues, but none were eligible till
sixty years of age. They were continued for life, except upon any notorious
crime; and this, as it prevented the inconveniences of too frequent a change,
so it was a lasting reward to the old, and a noble incentive to the young.
These formed the supreme court of judicature; and though there lay an appeal
from them to the people, yet as they were only convened at the pleasure of the
senate, and as the senators were not responsible for any wrong judgment, their
decrees generally past without a repeal. Indeed, for several ages, such was the
caution, and such the integrity of this tribunal, that none seemed desirous of
seeking farther justice, and both parties acquiesced in the justice of their
decree. However, the great power which the senate was thus possessed of, was
about a century after tempered by the erection of a superior court, called the
court of the EPHORI, which consisted of but five in number, and the members
were chosen annually into their osfice. They were elected from the people, and
had a power of arresting and imprisoning even the persons of their kings, if
they acted unbecoming their station.

The PEOPLE also had a nominal share in the government. They had their
assemblies consisting of citizens only, and also their great convention of all
persons who were free of the state. But this power of convening was but a mere
matter of form, as the senate alone was permitted to call them together, and as
it was in the option of that body to dismiss them at pleasure. The subject of
deliberation also was to be of their proposal, while the people, denied the
privilege of debating or discussing, could only reject or ratify with laconic
decision. To keep them still more helpless, they were left out of all offices
of the state, and were considered merely as machines, which their wiser
fellow-citizens were to conduct and employ.

So small a degree of power granted to the people might be apt to destroy these
institutions in their infancy, but to reconcile them to the change, Lycurgus
boldly resolved to give them a share in those lands from whence, by the
increasing riches of some, and the dissipation of others, they had been
deprived. To keep the people in plenty and dependence, seems to have been one
of the most refined strokes in this philosopher's legislation. The generality
or the people were at that time so poor, that they were destitute of every kind
of possession, whilst a small number of individuals were possessed of all the
lands and the wealth of the country. In order, therefore, to banish the
insolence, the sraud, and the luxury of the one, as well as the misery, the
repining, and the factious despair of the others, he persuaded the majority,
and forced the rest to give up all their lands to the commonwealth, and to make
a new division of them that they might all live together in perfect equality.
Thus all the sensual goods of life were equally distributed among the governors
and the governed, and superior merit alone conferred superior distinction.

Lycurgus accordingly divided all the lands of Laconia into thirty thousand
parts, and those of Sparta into nine thousand, and these he portioned out to
the respective inhabitants of each district. Each portion was sufficient to
maintain a family in that frugal manner he proposed; and, though the kings had
a larger share assigned them to support their dignity, yet their tables had
rather an air of decency and competency, than of superfluity or profusion. It
is said that some years after, as Lycurgus was returning from a long journey,
observing how equally the corn was divided in all parts of the country, he was
heard to observe smiling on those next him, Does not Laconia look like an
estate which several brothers have been dividing amongst them?

But it would have answered no permanent purpose to divide the lands, if the
money were still suffered to accumulate. To prevent, therefore, all other
distinction but that of merit, he resolved to level down all fortune to one
standard. He did not indeed strip those possessed of gold or silver of their
property; but, what was equivalent, he cried down its value, and suffered
nothing but iron money to pass in exchange for every commodity. This coin also
he made so heavy, and fixed at so low a rate, that a cart and two oxen were
required to carry home a sum of ten minas, or about twenty pounds English, and
a whole house was necessary to keep it in. This iron money had no currency
among any other of the Grecian states, who, so far from esteeming it, treated
it with the utmost contempt and ridicule. From the neglect of foreigners, the
Spartans themselves began to despise it so, that money was at last brought into
disuse, and few troubled themselves with more than was barely sufficient to
supply their necessities. Thus not only riches, but their attendant train of
avarice, fraud, rapine, and luxury, were banished from this simple state, and
the people found in ignorance of riches a happy substitute for the want of
those refinements they bestow.

But these institutions were not thought sufficient to prevent that tendency
which mankind have to private excess. A third regulation was therefore made,
commanding that all meals should be in public. He ordained that all the men
should eat in one common hall without distinction; and lest strangers should
attempt to corrupt his citizens by their example, a law was expressly made
against their continuance in the city. By these means frugality was not only
made necessary, but the use of riches was at once abolished. Every man sent
monthly his provisions to the common stock, with a little money for other
contingent expenses. These consisted of one bushel of flour, eight measures of
wine, five pounds of cheese, and two pounds and an half of figs. The tables
consisted of fifteen persons each, where none could be admitted but by the
consent of the whole company. Every one without exception of persons was
obliged to be at the common meal; and a long time after, when Agis returned
from a successful expedition, he was punished and reprimanded for having eaten
with his queen in private. The very children eat at these meals, and were
carried thither as to a school of temperance and wisdom. At these homely
repasts no rude or immoral conversation was permitted, no loquacious disputes
or ostentatious talking. Each endeavored to express his sentiments with the
utmost perspicuity and conciseness; wit was admitted to season the banquet, and
secrecy to give it security. As soon as a young man came into the room, the
oldest man in the company used to say to him, pointing to the door, Nothing
spoken here must go that way. Black broth was their favorite dish, of what
ingredients it was made is now known, but they used no flesh in their
entertainments; it probably resembled those lenten soups which are still in use
on the continent. Dionysius, the tyrant, found their fare very unpalatable;
but, as the cook asserted, the broth was nothing without the seasoning of
fatigue and hunger.

An injunction so rigorous, which thus cut off all the delicacies and
refinements of luxury, was by no means pleasing to the rich, who took every
occasion to insult the lawgiver upon his new regulations. The tumults it
excited were frequent; and in one of these, a young fellow whose name was
Alexander, struck out one of Lycurgus's eyes. But he had the majority of the
people on his side, who, provoked at the outrage, delivered the young man into
his hands to treat him with all proper severity. Lycurgus, instead of
testifying any brutal resentment, won over his aggressor by all the arts of
affability and tenderness, till, at last, from being one of the proudest and
most turbulent men of Sparta, he became an example of wisdom and moderation,
and an useful assistant to Lycurgus in promoting his new institutions.

Thus, undaunted by opposition, and steady in his designs, he went on to make a
thorough reformation in the manners of his countrymen. As the education of
youth was one of the most important objects of a legislator's care, he took
care to instill such early principles, that children should in a manner be born
with a sense of order and discipline. His grand principle was, that children
were properly the possession of the state, and belonged to the community more
than to their parents. To this end he began from the very time of their
conception, making it the mother's duty to use such diet and exercise as might
fit her to produce a vigorous and healthy offspring. As during this period, all
institutions were tinctured with the savageness of the times, it is not
wonderful that Lycurgus ordained that all such children as, upon a public view,
were deemed deformed or weakly, and unfitted for a future life of vigor and
fatigue, should be exposed to perish in a cavern near mount Taygetus. This was
considered as a public punishment upon the mother, and it was thought the
readiest way to lighten the state of a future encumbrance.

Those infants that were born without any capital defects were adopted as
children of the state, and delivered to their parents to be nursed with
severity and hardship. From their tenderest age they were accustomed to make no
choice in their eating, not to be afraid in the dark, or when left alone, not
to be peevish or fretful, to walk barefoot, to lie hard at nights, to wear the
same clothes winter and summer, and to fear nothing from their equals. At the
age of seven years they were taken from their parents, and delivered over to
the classes for a public education. Their discipline there was little else than
an apprenticeship to hardship, self-denial, and obedience. In these classes one
of the boys more advanced and experienced than the rest, presided as captain to
govern and chastise the refractory. Their very sports and exercises were
regulated according to the exactest discipline, and made up of labor and
fatigue. They went barefoot, with their heads shaved, and fought with one
another naked. While they were at table it was usual for the masters to
instruct the boys, by asking them questions concerning the nature of moral
actions, or the different merits of the most noted men of the time. The boys
were obliged to give a quick and ready answer, which was to be accompanied with
his reasons in the concisest manner, for a Spartan's language was as sparing as
his money was ponderous and bulky. All ostentatious learning was banished from
this simple commonwealth, their only study was to obey, their only pride was to
suffer hardship. Every art was practiced to harden them against adventitious
danger. There was yearly a custom of whipping them at the altar of Diana, and
the boy that bore this punishment with the greatest fortitude came off
victorious. This was inflicted publicly before the eyes of their parents, and
in the presence of the whole city; and many were known to expire under the
severity of the discipline without uttering a single groan. Even their own
fathers, when they saw them covered with blood and wounds, and ready to expire,
exhorted them to persevere to the end with constancy and resolution. Plutarch,
who says that he has seen several children expire under this cruel treatment,
tells us of one who having stolen a fox, and hid it under his coat, chose
rather to let it tear out his very bowels than discover the theft.

Every institution seemed tending to harden the body and sharpen the mind for
war. In order to prepare them for stratagems and sudden incursions, the boys
were permitted to steal from each other, but if they were caught in the fact,
they were punished for their want of dexterity. Such a permission, therefore,
was little better than a prohibition of theft, since the punishment followed,
as at present, in case of detection. In fact, by this institution, negligence
in the possessor was made justly liable to the loss of his possessions, a
consideration which has not been sufficiently attended to by subsequent
legislators.

At twelve years old the boys were removed into other class of a more advanced
kind. There, in order to crush the seeds of vice, which at that time began to
appear, their labor and discipline were increased with their age. There they
had their instructor from among the men called Paedonomus, and under him the
Irens, young men selected from their own body, to exercise a more constant and
immediate command over them. They had now their skirmishes between parties, and
their mock fights between larger bodies. In these they often fought with hands,
feet, teeth, and nails, with such obstinacy that it was common to see them
loose their eyes, and often their lives before the fray was determined. Such
was the constant discipline of their minority, which lasted till the age of
thirty, before which they were not permitted to marry, to go into the troops,
or to bear any office in the state.

With regard to the virgins, their discipline was equally strict with the
former. They were inured to a constant course of labor and industry until they
were twenty years old, before which time they were not allowed to be
marriageable. They also had their peculiar exercises. They ran, wrestled,
pitched the bar, and performed all these feats naked before the whole body of
the citizens. Yet this was thought no way indecent, as it was supposed that the
frequent view of the person would rather check than excite every looser
appetite. An education so manlike did not fail to produce in the Spartan women
corresponding sentiments. They were bold, frugal, and patriotic, filled with a
sense of honor, and a love of military glory. Some foreign women in
conversation with the wife of Leonidas saying, that the Spartan women alone
knew how to govern the men, she boldly replied, the Spartan women alone bring
forth men. A mother was known to give her son, who was going to battle, his
shield, with this remarkable advice; Return with it, or return upon it.
Implying, that rather than throw it from him in flight, he should be borne upon
it dead to his friends in Sparta. Another hearing that her son was killed
fighting for his country, she answered without any emotion, it was for that I
brought him into the world. After the battle of Leuctra, the parents of those
who died in the action, went to the temples to thank the gods that their sons
had done their duty, while those whose children survived that dreadful day
seemed inconsoleable.

Yet it must not be concealed, that in a city where the women were inspired
with such a passion for military glory, they were not equally remarkable for
connubial fidelity. In fact, there was no law against adultery, and an exchange
of husbands was often actually practiced among them. This was always indeed by
the mutual consent of parties, which removed the tedious ceremonies of a
divorce. One reason assigned for allowing this mutual liberty, was not so much
to gratify licentious desire, as to improve the breed of citizens, by matching
such as were possessed of mutual inclination. In fact, in many of the laws of
Lycurgus he seems to admit, that private vices may become public benefits, and
this among the number.

Besides these constitutional resolutions, there were many other general maxims
laid down that obtained the force of laws among them. They were forbid to
exercise any mechanic art. The chief occupation of the Spartans was bodily
exercises or hunting. The Helotes who had lost their liberty some centuries
before, and who had been condemned to perpetual slavery, tilled their lands for
them, receiving for their labor a bare subsistence. The citizens thus
possessed of competence and leisure, were mostly in company in their large
common halls, where they met and conversed together. They passed little of
their time alone, being accustomed to live like bees, always together, always
attentive to their chiefs and leaders. The love of their country and the public
good was their predominant passion, and all self-interest was lost in the
general wish for the welfare of the community. Pedarctus having missed the
honor of being chosen one of the three hundred who had a certain rank in the
city, converted his disappointment into joy, that there were three hundred
better men in Sparta than he.

Among the maxims of this legislator, it was forbidden them to make frequent
war upon the same enemies. By this inhibition they were restrained from lasting
and immoderate resentment, they were in no danger of teaching their discipline
to those they made war upon, and all their alliances were thus more frequently
renewed.

Whenever they had broken and routed their enemies, they never pursued them
farther than was necessary to make themselves sure of the victory. They thought
it sufficiently glorious to overcome, and were ashamed of destroying an enemy
that yielded or fled. Nor was this without answering some good purposes; for
the enemy, conscious that all who resisted were put to the sword, often fled,
as they were convinced that such a conduct was the surest means of obtaining
safety. Thus valor and generosity seemed the ruling motives of this new
institution; arms were their only exercise and employment, and their life was
much less austere in the camp than the city. The Spartans were the only people
in the world to whom the time of war was a time of ease and refreshment,
because then the severity of their manners was relaxed, and the men were
indulged in greater liberties. With them the first and most inviolable law of
war was never to turn their backs on the enemy, however disproportioned in
forces, nor to deliver up their arms until they resigned them with life. When
the poet Archilochus came to Sparta, he was obliged to quit the city for having
asserted in one of his poems that it was better for a man to lose his arms than
his life. Thus resolved upon conquest or death, they went calmly forward with
all the confidence of success, sure of meeting a glorious victory, or what they
valued equally, a noble death.

Thus depending upon their valor alone for safety, their legislator forbid
walling the city. It was his maxim that a wall of men was preferable to a wall
of brick, and that confined valor was scarce preferable to cowardice. Indeed a
city, in which were thirty thousand fighting men, stood in little need of walls
to protect it; and we have scarce an instance in history of their suffering
themselves to be driven to their last retreats. War and its honors was their
employment and ambition; their Helotes, or slaves, tilled their grounds, and
did all their servile drudgery. These unhappy men were in a manner bound to the
soil, it was not lawful to sell them to strangers, or to make them free. If at
any time their increase became inconvenient, or created a suspicion in their
fierce masters, there was a cryptia, or secret act, by which they were
permitted to destory them. From this barbarous severity, however, Lycurgus is
aquitted by Plutarch, but it is plain, that his institutions were not
sufficient to restrain the people from such baseness and cruelty. It was by
this act allowed for several companies of young men to go out of the city by
day, and concealing themselves in the thickets, to rush out in the night upon
their slaves, and kill all they could find in their way. Thucydides relates,
that two thousand of these slaves disappeared at once without ever after being
heard of. It is truly amazing, how a people like the Spartans, renowned for
lenity to the conquered, for submission to their superiors, for reverence to
old age, and friendship for each other, should yet be so very brutal to those
beneath them; to men that ought to be considered in every respect as their
equals, as their countrymen, and only degraded by an unjust usurpation. Yet
nothing is more certain than their cruel treatment; they were not only
condemned to the most servile occupations, but often destroyed without reason.
They were frequently made drunk and exposed before the children, in order to
deter them from so brutal a species of debauchery.

Such was the general purport of the institutions of Lycurgus, which from their
tendency gained the esteem and admiration of all the surrounding nations. The
Greeks were ever apt to be dazzled rather with splendid than useful virtues,
and praised the laws of Lycurgus, which at best were calculated rather to make
men warlike than happy, and to substitute insensibility to enjoyment. If
considered in a political light, the city of Lacedaemon was but a military
garrison, supported by the labor of a numerous peasantry that were slaves. The
laws, therefore, by which they were governed, are not much more rigorous than
many of the military institutions of modern princes, the same labor, the same
discipline, the same poverty, and the same subordination, is found in many of
the garrisoned towns of Europe that prevailed for so many centuries in Sparta.
The only difference that appears to me between a soldier of Lacedaemon, and a
soldier in garrison at Gravelin, is, that the one was permitted to marry at
thirty, and the other is obliged to continue single all his life; the one lives
in the midst of a civilized country, which he is supposed to protect, the other
lived in the midst of a number of civilized states, which he had no inclination
to offend. War is equally the trade of both, and a campaign is frequently a
relaxation from the more rigorous consinement of garrison duty.

When Lycurgus had thus completed his military institution, and when the form
of government he had established seemed strong and vigorous enough to support
itself, his next care was to give it all the permanence in his power. He,
therefore, signified to the people that something still remained for the
completion of his plan, and that he was under a necessity of going to consult
the oracle at Delphos for its advice. In the mean time, he persuaded them to
take an oath for the strict observance of all his laws till his return, and
then departed with a full resolution of never seeing Sparta more. When he was
arrived at Delphos, he consulted the oracle to know whether the laws he had
made were sufficient to render the Lacedaemonians happy; and being answered
that nothing was wanting to their perfection, he sent this answer to Sparta,
and then voluntarily starved himself to death. Others say, that he died in
Crete, ordering his body to be burnt, and his ashes to be thrown into the sea.
The death of this great lawgiver gave a sanction and authority to his laws
which his life was unable to confer. The Spartans regarded his end as the most
glorious of all his actions, and a noble finishing of all his former services;
they considered themselves as bound by every tie of gratitude and religion to a
strict observance of all his institutions; and the long continuance of the
Spartan government is a proof of their persevering resolution.

The city of Lacedaemon thus instituted, seemed only desirous of an opportunity
of displaying the superiority of their power among the neighboring states,
their rivals. The war between them and the Messenians soon taught them to know
the advantages of their military institution; but as I am hastening to more
important events, I will touch upon this as concisely as I can. There was a
temple of Diana common to the Messenians and Lacedaemonians, standing upon the
borders of either kingdom. It was there that the Messenians were accused of
attempting the chastity of some Spartan virgins, and of killing Teleclus, one
of the Spartan kings, who interposed in their defense. The Messenians, on the
other hand, denied the charge, and averred, that these supposed virgins were
young men thus dressed up with daggers under their clothes, and placed there by
Teleclus with an intent to surprise them. To the mutual resentment occasioned
by this, another cause of animosity was soon after added: Polychares, a
Messenian, who had won the prize in the Olympic games, let out some cows to
pasture to Euphaenus, a Lacedaemonian, who was to pay himself for their keeping
with a share of the increase. Euphaenus sold the cows, and pretended they were
stolen from him. Polychares sent his son to demand the money; but the
Lacedaemonian, to aggravate his crime, killed the young man, and persuaded his
countrymen to give no redress. Polychares, therefore, undertook to do himself
justice, and killed all the Lacedaemonians that came in his way. Expostulations
passed between both kingdoms, till at last the affair came to a general war,
which was carried on for many years with doubtful success. In this situation
the Messenians sent to consult the oracle of Delphos, who required the
sacrifice of a virgin of the family of Aepytus. Upon casting lots among the
descendants of this prince, the chance fell upon the daughter of Lyciscus, but
being thought to be supposititious, Aristodemus offered his daughter, whom all
allowed to be his own. Her lover, however, attempted to avert the blow, by
asserting, that she was with child by him, but her father was so enraged, that
he ripped up her belly with his own hand publicly to vindicate her innocence.
The enthusiasm which this sacrifice produced, served for a while to give the
Messenians the advantage, but being at last overthrown and besieged in the city
of Ithoe, Aristodemus finding all things desperate, slew himself upon his
daughter's grave. A. M. 3280.
With him fell the kingdom of Messenia, not without a most obstinate
resistance, and many a defeat of the Spartan army, which they held thus engaged
for above twenty years. Nor must we omit one memorable transaction of the
Lacedaemonians during this war: having drained their city of all its male
inhabitants, and obliged themselves by oath not to return until their designs
were accomplished; their women, in the mean time, remonstrated, that from their
long absence all posterity would be at an end To remedy this inconvenience,
they detached fifty of their most promising young men from the army to go to
Sparta, and to lie promiscuously with all the young women they fancied. The
offspring of these virgins were from them called Partheniae, who finding
themselves contemned and slighted by the Spartans on their return, joined some
years after in an insurrection with the Helotes, but were soon suppressed.
Being expelled the state, they went under the conduct of their captain,
Philantus, and settled at Tarentum, in Italy.

After a rigorous subjection of thirty-nine years, the Messenians once more
made a vigorous struggle for freedom, being headed by Aristomenes, a young man
of great courage and capacity. A. M. 3319.
The success of the first engagement was doubtful, and the Lacedaemonians being
advised by the oracle to send for a general from among the Athenians, this
politic state sent them Tyrtaeus, a poet and schoolmaster, whose chief business
was to harrangue and repeat his own verses. The Spartans were little pleased
with their new leader, but their veneration for the oracle kept them obedient
to his commands. Their success, however, did not seem to improve with their
duty; they suffered a defeat from Aristomenes, who, losing his shield in the
pursuit, their total overthrow was prevented. A second and a third defeat
followed soon after; so that the Lacedaemonians, quite dispirited, had thoughts
of concluding a peace upon any terms. But Tyrtaeus so enflamed them by his
orations and songs in praise of military glory, that they resolved upon another
battle, in which they were victorious, and soon after Aristomenes was taken
prisoner in a skirmish, with fifty of his followers.

The adventures of this hero deserve our notice. Being carried prisoner to
Sparta, he was thrown into a deep dungeon which had been used for the execution
of malefactors, and his fifty soldiers with him. They were all killed by the
fall except Aristomenes, who finding a wild beast at the bottom preying upon a
carcass, securing the animal's mouth, he continued to hold by the tail, until
the beast made directly to its hole. There finding the issue too narrow, he was
obliged to let go his hold, but following the track with his eye, he perceived
a glimmering from above, and at length wrought his way out. After this
extraordinary escape, he repaired immediately to his troops, and at their head
made a successful sally, by night, against the Corinthian forces. Nevertheless
he was once more shortly after taken by some Cretans; but his keepers being
made drunk, he stabbed them with their own daggers, and returned to his forces.
But his single valor was not sufficient to avert the ruin of his country;
although, with his own single prowess, he had thrice earned the Hecatomphonia,
a sacrifice due to those who had killed one hundred of the enemy hand to hand
in battle, yet the body of his forces being small, and fatigued with continual
duty, the city of Eira, which he defended, was taken, and the Messenians were
obliged to take refuge with Anaxilas, a prince of Sicily. A. M. 3340.
As for Tyrtaeus, the Lacedaemonians made him free of their city, which was the
highest honor they had in their power to bestow. By the accession of the
Messenian country to the territory of Sparta, this state became one of the most
powerful of all Greece, and was second only to Athens, which state it always
considered with an eye of jealousy.

CHAP. III. Of the Government of ATHENS, the Laws of SOLON, and the History of
the Republic from the Time of SOLON to the commencement of the PERSIAN War.
WE now return to Athens. Codrus, the last king of this state, having devoted
himself for the good of his country, a magistrate, under the title of Archon,
was appointed to succeed him. The first who bore this office was Medon, the son
of the late king, who, being opposed by his brother Nileus, was preferred by
the oracle, and accordingly invested with his new dignity. This magistracy was
at first for life; it was soon after reduced to a period of ten years, and at
last became annual, and in this state it continued for near three hundred
years. During this inactive government little offers to adorn the page of
history, the spirit of extensive dominion had not as yet entered into Greece,
and the citizens were too much employed in their private intrigues to attend to
foreign concerns. Athens therefore continued a long time incapable of enlarging
her power, content with safety amidst the contending interests of aspiring
potentates and factious citizens.

A desire of being governed by written laws at last made way for a new change
in government. A. M 3380.
For more than a century they had seen the good effects of laws in the
regulation of the Spartan commonwealth; and, as they were a more enlightened
people, they expected greater advantages from a new institution. In the choice,
therefore, of a legislator, they pitched upon Draco, a man of acknowledged
wisdom, and unshaken integrity, but rigid even beyond human sufferance. It does
not appear that any state of Greece was possessed of written laws before his
time. However, he was not afraid to enact the most severe laws, which laid the
same penalties on the most atrocious and the most trifling offenses. These
laws, which punished all crimes with death, and which were said not to be
written with ink, but with blood, were too cruel to be duly and justly
administered. Sentiments of humanity in the judges, compassion for the accused
when his fault was not equal to his suffering, the unwillingness of witnesses
to exact too cruel an atonement, their fears also of the resentment of the
people; all these conspired to render the laws obsolete before they could well
be put into execution. Thus, the new laws counteracted their own purposes, and
their excessive rigor paved the way for the most dangerous impunity.

It was in this distressful state of the commonwealth, that Solon was applied
to for his advice and assistance, as the wisest and the justest man of all
Athens. His great learning had acquired him the reputation of being the first
of the seven wise men of Greece, and his known humanity procured him the love
and veneration of every rank among his fellow-citizens. Solon was a native of
Salamis, an island dependent on Athens, but which had revolted to put itself
under the power of the Megareans. In attempting to recover this island, the
Athenians had spent much blood and treasure, until at last wearied out with
such ill success, a law was made rendering it capital ever to advise the
recovery of their lost possession. Solon, however, undertook to persuade them
to another trial, and feigning himself mad, ran about the streets, using the
most violent gestures and language; but the purport of all was, upbraiding the
Athenians for their remissness and effeminacy, in giving up their conquests in
despair. In short, he acted his part so well, by the oddity of his manner, and
the strength of his reasoning, that the people resolved upon another expedition
against Salamis; and, by a stratagem of his contrivance, in which he introduced
several young men upon the island in women's clothes, the place was surprised,
and added to the dominion of Athens.

But this was not the only occasion on which he exhibited superior address and
wisdom. At a time when Greece had carried the arts of eloquence, poetry, and
government, higher than they had yet been seen among mankind, Solon was
considered as one of the foremost in each perfection. The sages of Greece,
whose fame is still undiminished, acknowledged his merit, and adopted him as
their associate. The correspondence between these wise men was at once
instructive, friendly, and sincere. They were seven in number, namely, Thales
the Milesian, Solon of Athens, Chilo of Lacedaemon, Pittacus of Mitylene,
Periander of Corinth, Bias and Cleobulus, whose birth places are not
ascertained. Those sages often visited each other, and their conversations
generally turned upon the methods of instituting the best form of government,
or the arts of private happiness. One day when Solon went to Miletos to see
Thales, the first thing he said, was to express his surprise that Thales had
never desired to marry, or have children. Thales made him no answer then, but a
few days after, he contrived that a stranger, supposed to arrive from Athens,
should join their company. Solon, hearing from whence the stranger came, was
inquisitive after the news of his own city, but was only informed that a young
man died there, for whom the whole place was in the greatest affliction, as he
was reputed the most promising youth in all Athens. Alas! cried Solon, how much
is the poor father of the youth to be pitied! pray, what was his name? I heard
the name, replied the stranger, who was instructed for the occasion, but I have
forgot it: I only remember that all people talked much of his wisdom and
justice. Every answer afforded new matter of trouble and terror to the
inquisitive father, and he had just strength enough to ask if the youth was not
the son of Solon? The very same, replied the stranger; at which words Solon
showed all the marks of the most inconsoleable distress. This was the
opportunity which Thales wanted, who took him by the hand, and said to him,
with a smile, Comfort yourself my friend, all that has been told you is a mere
fiction, but may serve as a very proper answer to your question, why I never
thought proper to marry?

One day at the court of Periander of Corinth, a question was proposed, which
was the most perfect popular government? That, said Bias, where the law has no
superior. That, said Thales, where the inhabitants are neither too rich nor too
poor. That, said Anacharsis, the Scythian, where virtue is honored and vice
detested. That, said Pittacus, where dignities are always conferred upon the
virtuous, and never upon the base. That, said Cleobulus, where the citizens
fear blame more than punishment. That, said Chilo, where the laws are more
regarded than the orators. But Solon's opinion seems to have the greatest
weight, who said, where an injury done to the meanest subject is an insult upon
the whole constitution.

Upon a certain occasion, when Solon was conversing with Anacharsis, the
Scythian philosopher, about his intended reformations in the state; "Alas,
cried the Scythian, all your laws will be found to resemble spiders webs; the
weak and small flies will be caught and entangled, but the great and powerful
will always have strength enough to break through."

Solon's interview with Craesus king of Lydia, is still more celebrated. This
monarch, who was reputed the richest of all Asia Minor, was willing to make an
oslentatious display of his wealth before the Greek philosopher, and after
showing him immense heaps of treasure, and the greatest variety of other
ornaments, he demanded whether he did not think the possessor the most happy of
all mankind. No, replied Solon; I know one man more happy, a poor peasant of
Greece, who neither in affluence or poverty, has but few wants, and has learned
to supply them by his labor. This answer was by no means agreeable to the vain
monarch, who by his question only hoped for a reply that would tend to flatter
his pride. Willing, therefore, to extort one still more favorable, he asked
whether at least he did not think him happy. Alas, cried Solon what man can be
pronounced happy before he dies. The integrity and the wisdom of Solon's
replies appeared in the event. The kingdom of Lydia was invaded by Cyrus, the
empire destroyed, and Craesus himself was taken prisoner. When he was led out
to execution, according to the barbarous manners of the times, he then too late
recollected the maxims of Solon, and could not help crying out when on the
scaffold upon Solon's name: Cyrus hearing him repeat the name with great
earnestness, was desirous of knowing the reason; and being informed by Craesus
of that philosopher's remarkable observation, he began to fear for himself,
pardoned Craesus, and took him for the future into confidence and friendship.
Thus Solon had the merit of saving one king's life, and of reforming another.

Such was the man to whom the Athenians applied for assistance in reforming the
severity of their government, and instituting a just body of laws. Athens was
at that time divided into as many factions as there were different sorts of
inhabitants in Attica. Those that lived upon the mountains were fond of exact
equality, those that lived in the low country were for the dominion of a few,
and those that dwelt on the sea coasts, and were consequently addicted to
commerce, were for keeping those parties to exactly balanced, as to permit
neither to prevail. But, besides these, there was a fourth party, and that by
much the most numerous, consisting wholly of the poor, who were grievously
harrassed and oppressed by the rich, and loaded with debts which they were not
able to discharge. This unhappy party, which, when they know their own
strength, must ever prevail, were now determined to throw off the yoke of their
oppressors, and to choose themselves a chief who should make a reformation in
government, by making a new division of lands.

As Solon had never sided with either, he was regarded as the refuge of all,
the rich liking him because he was rich, and the poor because he was honest.
Though he was at first unwilling to undertake so dangerous an employment, he at
last suffered himself to be chosen archon, and to be constituted supreme
legislator with the unanimous consent of all. This was a situation in which
nothing could be added to his power, yet many of the citizens advised him to
make himself king, but he had too much wisdom to seek after a name which would
render him obnoxious to many of his fellow-citizens, while he was in fact
possessed of more than regal authority. A tyranny, he would say, resembles a
fair garden, it is a beautiful spot while we are within, but it wants a way to
get out at.

Rejecting, therefore, the wish of royalty, he resolved upon settling a form of
government that should be founded on the basis of just and reasonable liberty.
Not venturing to meddle with certain disorders which he looked upon as
incurable, he undertook to bring about no other alterations but such as were
apparently reasonable to the meanest capacity. In short, it was his aim to give
the Athenians not the best of possible constitutions, but the very best they
were capable of receiving. His first attempt was, therefore, in favor of the
poor, whose debts he abolished at once, by an express law of insolvency. But to
do this with the least injury he could to the creditor, he raised the value of
money in a moderate proportion, by which he nominally increased their riches.
But his management on this occasion had like to have had very dangerous
consequences, for some of his friends, to whom the scheme had been previously
communicated, took up vast sums of money while it was low, in order to be
possessed of the difference when it became of greater value. Solon himself was
suspected of having a hand in this fraud, but to wipe off all suspicion, he
remitted his debtors five, or, as others say, fifteen talents, and thus
regained the confidence of the people.

His next step was to repeal all the laws enacted by Draco, except those
against murder. He then proceeded to the regulation of offices, employments,
and magistracies, all which he left in the hands of the rich. He distributed
the rich citizens into three classes, ranging them according to their incomes.
Those that were found to have five hundred measures yearly, as well in corn as
in liquids, were placed in the first rank, those that had three hundred were
placed in the second, and those that had but two hundred made up the third. All
the rest of the citizens whose income fell short of two hundred measures, were
comprised in a fourth and last class, and were considered as unqualified for
any employment whatever. But to compensate for this exclusion, he gave every
private citizen a privilege of voting in the great assembly of the whole body
of the state. This, indeed, at first might appear a concession of small
consequence, but it was soon found to contain very solid advantages. For, by
the laws of Athens, it was permitted, after the determination of the
magistrates, to appeal to the general assembly of the people, and thus, in
time, all causes of weight and moment came before them.

In some measure to counteract the influence of a popular assembly, he gave
greater weight to the court of Areopagus, and also instituted another council
consisting of four hundred. The Areopagus, so called from the place where the
court was held, had been established some centuries before, but Solon restored
and augmented its authority. To this court was committed the care of causing
the laws to be observed and put in execution. Before his time the citizens of
the greatest probity and justice were made judges of that tribunal. Solon was
the first who thought it convenient that none should be honored with that
dignity but such as had passed through the office of archon. Nothing was so
august as this court, and its reputation for judgment and integrity became so
very great, that the Romans sometimes referred causes which were too intricate
for their own decision, to the determination of this tribunal. Nothing was
regarded here but truth; that no external objects might pervert justice, the
tribunal was held in darkness, and the advocates were denied all attempts to
work upon the passions of the judges. Superior to this, Solon instituted the
great council of four hundred, who were to judge upon appeals from the
Areopagus, and maturely to examine every question before it came to be debated
in a general assembly of the people.

Such was the reformation in the general institutions for the good of the
state, his particular laws for dispensing justice were more numerous. In the
first place, all persons who in public dissensions and differences espoused
neither party, but continued to act with a blameable neutrality, were declared
infamous, condemned to perpetual punishment, and to have all their estates
confiscated. Nothing could more induce mankind to a spirit of patriotism than
this celebrated law. A mind thus obliged to take part in public concerns,
learns, from habit, to make those concerns its principal care, and
self-interest quickly sinks before them. By this method of accustoming the
minds of the people to look upon that man as an enemy that should appear
indifferent and unconcerned in the misfortunes of the public, he provided the
state with a quick and general resource in every dangerous emergency.

He next permitted every particular person to espouse the quarrel of any one
that was injured or insulted. By this means, every person in the state became
the enemy of him who did wrong, and the turbulent thus were overpowered by the
number of their opponents.

He abolished the custom of giving portions in marriage with young women,
unless they were only daughters. The bride was to carry no other fortune to her
husband than three suits of clothes, and some household goods of little value.
It was his aim to prevent making matrimony a traffic, he considered it as an
honorable connection, calculated for the mutual happiness of both parties, and
the general advantage of the state.

Before this lawgiver's time the Athenians were not allowed to make their
wills, but the wealth of the deceased naturally, and of course, devolved upon
his children. Solon allowed every one that was childless to dispose of his
whole estate as he thought fit, preferring by that means friendship to kindred,
and choice to necessity and constraint. From this institution the bond between
the parents and children became more solid and firm, it confirmed the just
authority of the one, and increased the necessary dependence of the other.

He made a regulation to lessen the rewards to the victors at the Olympic and
Isthmian games. He considered it as unjust, that a set of idle people,
generally useless, often dangerous to the state, should be allotted those
rewards which should go to the deserving. He wished to see those emoluments go
to the widows and families of such as fell in the service of their country, and
to make the stipend of the state honorable, by being conferred only on the
brave.

To encourage industry, the Areopagus was charged with the care of examining
into every man's method of living, and of chastising all who led an idle life.
The unemployed were considered as a set of dangerous and turbulent spirits,
eager after innovation, and hoping to mend their fortunes from the plunder of
the state. To discountenance all idleness, therefore, a son was not obliged to
support his father in old age or necessity, if the latter had neglected giving
him some trade or occupation. All illegitimate children were also exempted from
the same duty, as they owed little to their parents except an indelible
reproach.

It was forbidden to give ill language in public; the magistrates who were not
eligible till thirty were to be particularly circumspect in their behavior,
and it was even death for an archon to be taken drunk. It is observable that he
made no law against parricide, as supposing it a crime that could never exist
in any community.

With regard to women, he permitted any man to kill an adulterer if he was
taken in the fact. He allowed of public brothels, but prohibited mercenary
prostitutes from keeping company with modest women, and as a badge of
distinction to wear flowered garments. The men also who were notorious for
frequenting their company were not allowed to speak in public, and he who
forced a woman incurred a very heavy fine.

These were the chief institutions of this celebrated lawgiver, and although
neither so striking, nor yet so well authorized as those of Lycurgus, they did
not fail to operate for several succeeding ages, and seemed to gather strength
by observance. After he had framed these institutes, his next care was to give
them such notoriety that none could plead ignorance. To this end transcripts of
them were publicly hung up in the city for every one to peruse, while a set of
magistrates named Thesmothetae, were appointed to revise them carefully, and
distinctly repeat them once a year. Then, in order to perpetuate his statutes,
he engaged the people by a public oath to observe them religiously, at least
for the term of an hundred years; and thus having completed the task assigned
him, he withdrew from the city to avoid the importunity of some, and the
captious petulance of others. For, as he well knew, it was hard, if not
impossible, to please all.

Solon being thus employed on his travels in visiting Egypt, Lydia, and several
other countries, left Athens to become habituated to his new institutions, and
to try by experience the wisdom of their formation. But it was not easy for a
city long torn by civil dissensions to yield implicit obedience to any laws,
how wisely soever framed; their former animosities began to revive when that
authority was removed which alone could hold them in subjection. The factions
of the state were headed by three different leaders, who enflamed the animosity
of the people against each other, hoping by the subversion of all order, to
indulge their own private hopes of aspiring. A person named Lycurgus was at the
head of the people that inhabited the low country, Pisistratus declared for
those who lived in the mountains, and Megacles was the leader of the
inhabitants upon the sea coast.

Pisistratus was of these the most powerful. He was a well bred man, of a
gentle and insinuating behavior, ready to succor and assist the poor, whose
cause he pretended to espouse. He was wise, and moderate to his enemies, a most
artful and accomplished dissembler, and was every way virtuous except in his
inordinate ambition. His ambition gave him the appearance of possessing
qualities which he really wanted, he seemed the most zealous champion for
equality among the citizens, while he was actually aiming at the entire
subversion of freedom, and he declared loudly against all innovations, while he
was actually meditating a change. The giddy multitude caught by these
appearances were zealous in seconding his views, and without examining his
motives were driving headlong to tyranny and destruction.

It was just at the eve of success, and upon the point of being indulged in his
utmost ambition, that Pisistratus had the mortification of seeing Solon return
after an absence of ten years, apprized of his designs, and willing to subvert
his schemes. Sensible, therefore, of his danger, and conscious of the
penetration of this great lawgiver, the aspiring demagogue used all his
artifice to conceal his real designs, and while he flattered him in public,
used every endeavor to bring over the people to second his interests. Solon at
first endeavored to oppose art to his cunning, and to foil him at his own
weapons. He praised him in his turn, and was heard to declare, what might have
been true, that excepting the immoderate ambition of Pisistratus, he knew no
man of greater, or more exalted virtues. Still, however, he set himself to
counteract his projects, and to defeat his designs before they were ripe for
execution.

But in a vicious commonwealth, no assiduity can warn, no wisdom protect.
Pisistratus still urged his schemes with unabating ardour, and every day made
new proselytes by his professions and his liberalities. At length, finding his
schemes ripe for open action, he gave himself several wounds, and in that
condition, with his body all bloody, he caused himself to be carried in his
chariot to the marketplace, where, by his complaints and eloquence, he so
enslamed the populace, that they considered him as the victim of their cause,
and as suffering such cruel treatment in their defense. An assembly of the
people was, therefore, immediately convened, from whom he demanded a guard of
fifty persons for his future security. It was in vain that Solon used all his
authority and eloquence to oppose so dangerous a request. He considered his
sufferings as merely counterfeited. He compared him to Ulysses in Homer, who
cut himself with similar designs; but he alleged that he did not act the part
right, for the design of Ulysses was to deceive his enemies, but that of
Pisistratus was leveled against his friends and supporters. He upbraided the
people with their stupidity, telling them, that for his own part he had sense
enough to see through this design, but they only had strength enough to oppose
it. His exhortations, however, were vain, the party of Pisistratus prevailed,
and a guard of fifty men was appointed to attend him. This was all that he
aimed at, for now having the protection of so many creatures of his own,
nothing remained but insensibly to increase their number. Thus every day his
hirelings were seen to augment, while the silent fears of the citizens
increased in equal proportion. But it was now too late, for having raised the
number to put him beyond the danger of a repuise, he at length seized upon the
citadel, while none was left who had courage or conduct to oppose.

In this general consternation, which was the result of folly on the one hand,
and treachery on the other, the whole city was one scene of tumult and
disorder, some flying, others inly complaining, others preparing for slavery
with patient submission. Solon was the only man who, without fear or shrinking,
deplored the folly of the times, and reproached the Athenians with their
cowardice and treachery. You might, said he, with ease have crushed the tyrant
in the bud, but nothing now remains but to pluck him up by the roots. As for
himself, he had at least the satisfaction of having discharged his duty to his
country and the laws; and, as for the rest, he had nothing to fear, and now
upon the destruction of his country, his only confidence was in his great age,
which gave him hopes of not being a long survivor. In fact, he did not survive
the liberty of his country above two years; he died at Cyprus in the eightieth
year of his age, lamented and admired by every state of Greece. Besides his
skill in legislation, Solon was remarkable for several other shining
qualifications. He understood eloquence in so high a degree, that from him
Cicero dates the origin of eloquence in Athens. He was successful also in
poetry, and Plato asserts, that it was only for want of due application that he
did not come to dispute the prize with Homer himself.

The death of Solon only served to involve Athens in new troubles and
commotions. Lycurgus and Megacles, the leaders of the two opposite factions,
uniting, drove Pisistratus out of the city, but he was soon after recalled by
Megacles, who gave him his daughter in marriage. New disturbances arose;
Pisistratus was twice deposed, and twice found means to reinstate himself, for
he had art to acquire power, and moderation to maintain it. The mildness of his
government, and his implicit submission to the laws, made the people forget the
means by which he acquired his power; and, caught by his lenity, they
overlooked his usurpation. His gardens and pleasure grounds were free to all
the citizens; and he is said to be the first who opened a public library at
Athens. Cicero is of opinion, that Pisistratus first made the Athenians
acquainted with the books of Homer, that he disposed them in the order in which
they now remain, and first caused them to be read at the feasts called
Panathanea. His justice is not less remarkable than his politeness. Being
accused of murder, though it was in the time of his tyranny, he disdained to
take the advantage of his authority, but went in person to plead his cause
before the Areopagus, where his accuser would not venture to appear. In short,
he was master of many excellent qualities, and perverted them no farther than
as they stood in competition with empire. Nothing could be objected to him but
his having greater power than the laws, and by not exerting that power he
almost reconciled the citizens to royalty. Upon these accounts he was
deservedly oppofed to usurpers of fewer virtues, and there feemed such a
resemblance between him and a more successful invader of his country's freedom,
that Julius Caesar was called the Pisistratus of Rome.

Pisistratus dying in tranquillity, transmitted the sovereign power to his
sons, Hippias and Hipparchus, who seemed to inherit all their father's virtues.
A passion for learning and its professors, had for some time prevailed in
Athens; and this city, which had already far out-gone all its cotemporaries in
all the arts of refinement, seemed to submit tamely to kings, who made learning
their pride and their profession. Anacreon, Simonides, and others, were invited
to their courts, and richly rewarded. Schools were instituted for the
improvement of youth in the learned professions, and Mercuries were set up in
all the highways, with moral sentences written upon them, for the instruction
of the lowest vulgar. Their reign, however, lasted but eighteen years, and
ended upon the following occasion.

Harmodius and Aristogiton, both citizens of Athens, had contracted a very
strict friendship for each other, and resolved to revenge the injuries which
should be committed against either with common resentment. Hipparchus being
naturally amorous, debauched the sister of Harmodius, and afterward published
her shame as she was about to walk in one of the sacred processions, alleging,
that she was not in a condition to assist at the ceremony. Such a complicated
indignity naturally excited the resentment of the two friends, who formed a
fixed resolution of destroying the tyrants, or falling in the attempt. Willing,
however, to wait the most favorable opportunity, they deferred their purpose
to the feast of the Panathanea, in which the ceremony required that all the
citizens should attend in armor. For their greater security, they admitted
only a small number of their friends into the secret of their design,
conceiving that upon the first commotion they should not want for abettors.
Thus resolved, the day being come, they went early into the marketplace, each
armed with his dagger, and steadfast to his purpose. In the mean time, Hippias
was seen issuing with his followers from the palace, to give orders without the
city to the guards for the intended ceremony. As the two friends continued to
follow him at a little distance, they perceived one of those to whom they had
communicated their design, talking very familiarly with him, which made them
apprehend their plot was betrayed. Eager, therefore, to execute their design,
they were preparing to strike the blow, but recollected that the real aggressor
would thus go unpunished. They once more, therefore, returned into the city,
willing to begin their vengeance upon the author of their indignities. They
were not long in quest of Hipparchus, they met him upon their return, and
rushing upon him, dispatched him with their daggers without delay, but were
soon after themselves slain in the tumult. Hippias hearing of what was done, to
prevent farther disorders, got all these disarmed whom he in the least
suspected of being privy to the design, and then meditated revenge.

Among the friends of the late assertors of freedom, was one Leona, a
courtezan, who by the charms of her beauty, and her skill in playing on the
harp, had captivated some of the conspirators, and was supposed to be deeply
engaged in the design. As the tyrant, for such the late attempt had rendered
him, was conscious that nothing was concealed from this woman, he ordered her
to be put to the torture, in order to extort the names of accomplices. But she
bore all the cruelty of their torments with invincible constancy; and lest she
should in the agony of pain be induced to a confession, she bit off her own
tongue and spit it in the tyrant's face. In this manner she died faithful to
the cause of liberty, showing the world a remarkable example of constancy in
her sex. The Athenians would not suffer the memory of so heroic an action to
pass into oblivion. They erected a statue to her memory, in which a lioness was
represented without a tongue.

In the mean time, Hippias put no bounds to his indignation. A rebellious
people ever makes a suspicious tyrant. Numbers of citizens were put to death;
and to guard himself for the future against a like enterprise, he endeavored
to establish his power by foreign alliances. He gave his daughter in marriage
to the son of the tyrant of Lampsacus, he cultivated a correspondence with
Artaphanes, governor of Sardis, and endeavored to gain the friendship of the
Lacedaemonians, who were at that time the most powerful people of Greece.

But he was supplanted in those very alliances from which he hoped the greatest
assistance. The family of the Alcmaeonidae, who from the beginning of the
revolution had been banished from Athens, endeavored to undermine his
interests at Sparta, and they at length succeeded. Being possessed of great
riches, and also very liberal in their distribution, among other public
services, they obtained liberty to rebuild the temple at Delphos, which they
fronted in a most magnificence manner with Parian marble. So noble a
munificence was not without a proper acknowledgement of gratitude from the
priestess of Apollo, who, willing to oblige them, made her oracle the echo of
their desires. As there was nothing, therefore, which this family so ardently
desired as the downfall of regal power in Athens, the priestess seconded their
intentions, and whenever the Spartans came to consult the oracle, no promise
was ever made of the god's assistance, but upon condition that Athens should be
set free. This order was so often repeated by the oracle, that the Spartans at
last resolved to obey. Their first attempts were, however, unsuccessful; the
troops they sent against the tyrant were repulsed with loss. A second effort
succeeded. Athens was besieged, and the children of Hippias were made prisoners
as they were secretly conveying to a place of safety out of the city. To redeem
these from slavery, the father was obliged to come to an accommodation, by
which he consented to give up his pretensions to the sovereign power, and to
depart out of the Athenian territories in the space of five days. Thus, Athens
was once more set free from its tyrants, and obtained its liberty the very same
year that the kings were expelled from Rome. A. M. 3496
The family of Alcmaeon were chiefly instrumental, but the people seemed fonder
of acknowledging their obligations to the two friends who struck the first
blow. The names of Harmodius and Aristogiton were held in the highest respect
in all succeeding ages, and scarce considered inferior even to the gods
themselves. Their statues were erected in the marketplace, an honor which had
never been rendered to any before; and, gazing upon these, the people caught a
love for freedom, and a detestation for tyranny, which neither time nor terrors
could ever after remove.

CHAP. IV. A short Survey of the State of GREECE previous to the PERSIAN War.
HITHERTO we have seen the states of Greece in constant fluctuation, different
states rising, and others disappearing, one petty people opposed to another,
and both swallowed up by a third. Every city emerging from the ancient form of
government which was originally imposed upon it, and by degrees acquiring
greater freedom. We have seen the introduction of written laws, and the
benefits they produced by giving stability to government.

During these struggles for power among their neighboring states, and for
freedom at home, the moral sciences, the arts of eloquence, poetry, arms, were
making a rapid progress among them, and those institutions which they
originally borrowed from the Egyptians, were every day receiving signal
improvements. As Greece was now composed of several small republics bordering
upon each other, and differing in their laws, characters, and customs, this was
a continual source of emulation, and every city was not only desirous of
warlike superiority, but also of excelling in all the arts of peace and
refinement. Hence they were always under arms, and continually exercised in
war, while their philosophers and poets traveled from city to city, and by
their exhortations and songs, warmed them with a love of virtue, and with an
ardour for military glory. These peaceful and military accomplishments raised
them to their highest pitch of grandeur, and they now only wanted an enemy
worthy of their arms to show the world their superiority. The Persian monarchy,
the greatest at that time in the world, soon offered itself as their opponent,
and the contest ended with its total subversion.

But as Greece was continually changing not only its government, but its
customs, as in one century it presented a very different picture from what it
offered in the preceding, it will be necessary to take a second view of this
confederacy of little republics previous to their contests with Persia, as by
comparing their strength with that of their opponent, we shall find how much
wisdom, discipline, and valor, are superior to numbers, wealth, and
ostentation.

Foremost in this confederacy we may reckon the city of Athens, commanding the
little state of Attica, their whole dominions scarce exceeding the largest of
our English counties in circumference. But what was wanting in extent was made
up by the citizens being inured to war, and impressed with the highest ideas of
their own superiority. Their orators, their philosophers, and their poets, had
already given lessons of politeness to mankind; and their generals, though
engaged only in petty conflicts with their neighbors, had begun to practice
new stratagems in war. There were three kinds of inhabitants in Athens;
citizens, strangers, and servants. Their number usually amounted to twenty-one
thousand citizens, ten thousand strangers, and from forty to threescore
thousand servants.

A citizen could only be such by birth, or adoption. To be a natural denizen of
Athens, it was necessary to be born of a father and mother both Athenians, and
both free. The people could confer the freedom of the city upon strangers, and
those whom they had so adopted, enjoyed almost the same rights and privileges
as the natural citizens. The quality of citizen of Athens was sometimes granted
in honor and gratitude to those who merited well of the state, as to
Hippocrates the physician; and even kings sometimes canvassed that title for
themselves and their children. When the young men attained the age of twenty,
they were enrolled upon the list of citizens, after having taken an oath, and
in virtue of this they became members of the state.

Strangers, or foreigners, who came to settle at Athens for the sake of
commerce, or of exercising any trade, had no share in government, nor votes in
the assemblies of the people. They put themselves under the protection of some
citizen, and upon that account were obliged to render him certain duties and
services. They paid a yearly tribute to the state of twelve drachmas, and in
default of payment were made slaves, and exposed to sale.

Of servants, there were some free, and others slaves, who had been taken in
war, or bought of such as trafficked in them. The Athenians were as remarkable
for their lenity to these unhappy men, as the Spartans were noted for their
fierceness and rigidity. There was even an asylum for slaves, where the bones
of Theseus had been interred; and that asylum subsisted for near two thousand
years. When slaves were treated with too much rigor and inhumanity, they might
bring their masters to justice; who, if the fact were sufficiently proved, were
obliged to sell them to another master. They could even ransom themselves
against their master's consent, when they had laid up money enough for that
purpose, for out of what they got by their labor, after having paid a certain
proportion to their masters, they kept the remainder for themselves, and made a
stock of it at their own disposal. Private persons when they were satisfied
with their services, often gave them their liberty; and when the necessity of
the times obliged the state to make their greatest levies, they were enrolled
among the troops, and from thence were ever after free.

The revenues of this city, according to Aristophanes, amounted to two thousand
talents, or about three hundred thousand pounds of our money. They were
generally gathered from the taxes upon agriculture, the sale of woods, the
produce of mines, the contributions paid them by their allies, a capitulation
levied upon the inhabitants of the country, as well natives as strangers, and
from fines laid upon different misdemeanors. The application of these revenues
was in paying the troops, both by land and sea, building and fitting out
sleets, keeping up and repairing public buildings, temples, walls, ports, and
citadels. But in the decline of the republic, the greatest part was consumed in
frivolous expenses, games, feasts, and shows, which cost immense sums, and were
of no manner of utility to the state.

But the greatest glory of Athens, was its being the school and abode of polite
learning, arts, and sciences. The study of poetry, eloquence, philosophy, and
mathematics began there, and came almost to their utmost perfection. The young
people were sent first to learn grammar under masters who taught them
regularly, and upon the principles of their own language. Eloquence was studied
with still greater attention, as in that popular government it opened the way
to the highest employments. To the study of rhetoric was annexed that of
philosophy, which comprised all the sciences; and in these there were many
masters, very conversant, but, as is common, their vanity still greater than
their pretensions.

All the subordinate states of Greece seemed to make Athens the object of their
imitation; and, though inferior to it upon the whole, yet each produced great
scholars, and remarkable warriors in its turn. Sparta alone took example from
no other state, but still rigorously attached to the institutions of its great
lawgiver, Lycurgus, it disdained all the arts of peace, which, while they
polished, served to enervate the mind, and, formed only for war, they looked
forward to campaigns and battles, as scenes of rest and tranquillity. All the
laws of Sparta, and all the institutions of Lycurgus, seemed to have no other
object than war; all other employments, arts, polite learning, sciences,
trades, and even husbandry itself, were prohibited amongst them. The citizens
of Lacedaemon were of two sorts, either those who inhabited the city of Sparta,
and, who for that reason were called Spartans, and those who inhabited the
country dependent thereon. In the times of Lycurgus the Spartans amounted to
nine thousand men, the countrymen to thirty thousand. This number was rather
diminished than increased in succeeding times, but it still composed a
formidable body, that often gave laws to the rest of Greece. The Spartan
soldiers, properly so called, were considered as the flower of the nation, and
we may judge of their estimation by the anxiety the republic expressed when
three hundred of them were once taken prisoners by the Athenians.

But notwithstanding the great valor of the Spartan state, it was formed
rather for a defensive than an offensive war. They were always careful to spare
the troops of their country, and as they had very little money, they were not
in a capacity to send their armies upon distant expeditions.

The armies both of Sparta and Athens were composed of four sorts of troops:
citizens, allies, mercenaries, and slaves. The greatest number of troops in the
two republics were composed of allies, who were paid by the cities who sent
them. Those which received pay from their employers were styled mercenaries.
The number of slaves attending on every army was very great, and the Helotes,
in particular, were employed as light infantry.

The Greek infantry consisted of two kinds of soldiers; the one heavy armed,
and carrying great shields, spears, and scymetars; the other light armed,
carrying javelins, bows, and slings. These were commonly placed in the front of
the battle, or upon the wings, to shoot their arrows, or fling their javelins
and stones at the enemy, and then retire through the intervals behind the
ranks, to dart out occasionally upon the retiring enemy.

The Athenians were pretty much strangers to cavalry, and the Lacedaemonians
did nor begin the use till after the war with Messene. They raised their horse
principally in a small city not far from Lacedaemon, called Sciros, and they
were always placed on the extremity of the left wing, which post they claimed
as their rightful station.

But to recompense this defect of cavalry, the Athenians, in naval affairs, had
a great superiority over all the states of Greece. As they had an extensive sea
coast; and as the profession of a merchant was held reptuable among them, their
navy increased, and was at length sufficiently powerful to intimidate the
fleets of Persia.

Such were the two states, that in some measure engrossed all the power of
Greece to themselves; and, though several petty kingdoms still held their
governments in independence, yet they owed their safety to the mutual jealousy
of these powerful rivals, and always found shelter from the one against the
oppressions of the other. Indeed the dissimilarity of their habits, manners,
and education, served as well to divide these two states, as their political
ambition. The Lacedaemonians were severe, and seemed to have something almost
brutal in their character. A government too rigid, and a life too laborious,
rendered their tempers haughtily sullen and untractable. The Athenians were
naturally obliging and agreeable, cheerful among each other, and humane to
their inferiors, but they were restless, unequal, timorous friends, and
capricious protectors. From hence neither republic could sufficiently win over
the smaller states of Greece to their interests; and, although their ambition
would not suffer the country to remain in repose, yet their obvious defects
were always a bar to the spreading their dominion. Thus the mutual jealousy of
these states kept them both in constant readiness for war, while their common
defects kept the lesser states independent.

CHAP. V. From the Expulsion of HIPPIAS to the Death of DARIUS.
IT was in this disposition of Athens and Sparta, and of the lesser states,
their neighbors, that the Persian monarchy began to interest itself in their
disputes, and made itself an umpire in their contentions for liberty, only to
seize upon the liberties of all. It has been already related, that Hippias
being besieged in Athens, and his children being taken prisoners, in order to
release them, he consented to abdicate the sovereign power, and to leave the
dominions of Athens in five days. Athens, however, in recovering its liberty,
did not enjoy that tranquillity which freedom is thought to bestow. Two of the
principal citizens, Calisthenes, a favorite of the people, and Isagoras, who
was supported by the rich, began to contend for that power which they had but a
little before joined in depressing. The former, who was become very popular,
made an alteration in the form of their establishment; and, instead of four
tribes, whereof they before consisted, enlarged their number to ten. He also
instituted the manner of giving votes by Ostracism, as it was called. The
manner of performing this, was for every citizen, not under sixty years old, to
give in a name written upon a tile, or oyster-shell, (from whence the method of
voting had its name) and he upon whom the majority fell was pronounced banished
for ten years. These laws evidently calculated to increase the power of the
people, were so displeasing to Isagoras, that, rather than submit, he had
recourse to Cleomenes king of Sparta, who undertook to espouse his quarrel. In
fact, the Lacedaemonians only wanted a favorable pretext for lessening and
destroying the power of Athens, which, in consequence of the command of the
oracle, they had so lately rescued from tyranny. Cleomenes, therefore, availing
himself of the divided state of the city, entered Athens, and procured the
banishment of Calisthenes, with seven hundred families more, who had sided with
him in the late commotions. Not content with this, he endeavored to new model
the state, but being strongly opposed by the senate, he seized upon the
citadel, from whence, however, in two days he was obliged to retire.
Calisthenes perceiving the enemy withdrawn, returned with his followers, and
finding it vain to make any farther attempts for power, restored the government
as settled by Solon.

In the mean time, the Lacedaemonians repenting the services they had rendered
their rival state, and perceiving the imposture of the oracle, by which they
were thus impelled to act against their own interests, began to think of
reinstating Hippias on the throne. But, previous to their attempt, they judged
it prudent to consult the subordinate states of Greece, and to see what hopes
they had of their concurrence and approbation. Nothing however could be more
mortifying than the universal detestation with which their proposal was
received by the deputies of the states of Greece. The deputy of Corinth
expressed the utmost indignation at the design, and seemed astonished that the
Spartans, who were the avowed enemies of tyrants, should thus espouse the
interests of one noted for cruelty and usurpation. The rest of the states
warmly seconded his sentiments, and the Lacedaemonians, covered with confusion
and remorse, abandoned Hippias and his cause for ever after.

Hippias being thus frustrated in his hopes of exciting the Greeks to second
his pretensions, was resolved to have recourse to one who was considered as a
much more powerful patron. Wherefore, taking his leave of the Spartans, he
applied himself to Artaphernes, governor of Sardis, for the king of Persia,
whom he endeavored by every art to engage in a war against Athens. He
represented to him the divided state of the city, he enlarged upon its riches,
and the happiness of its situation for trade. He added the ease with which it
might be taken, and the glory that would attend success. Influenced by these
motives, the pride and the avarice of the Persian court were enflamed, and
nothing was so ardently sought as the pretext of a dispute with the Athenians.
When, therefore, that city sent to the Persian court to vindicate their
proceedings, alleging, that Hippias deserved no countenance from so great a
people; the answer returned was, That if the Athenians would be safe, they must
admit Hippias for their king. Athens having so lately thrown off the yoke, had
too lively a sense of its past calamities to accept safety upon such base
conditions, and resolved to suffer the last extremity rather than open their
gates to a tyrant. When Artaphernes, therefore, demanded the restoration of
Hippias, the Athenians boldly returned him a downright and absolute refusal.
From this arose the war between Greece and Persia, one of the most glorious,
and the most remarkable that ever graced the annals of kingdoms.

But there were more causes than one tending to make a breach between these
powerful nations, and producing an irreconcilable aversion for each other. The
Greek colonies of Ionia, Aeolia, and Caria, that were settled for above five
hundred years in Asia Minor, were at length subdued by Craesus king of Lydia;
and he, in turn, sinking under the power of Cyrus, his conquests of course fell
in with the rest of his dominions. The Persian monarch thus possessed of a very
extensive territory, placed governors over the several cities that were thus
subdued; and as men bred up in a despotic court, were likely enough to imitate
the example set them at home, it is probable enough they abused their power. Be
this as it may, in all the Greek cities they were called Tyrants; and as these
little states had not yet lost all idea of freedom, they took every opportunity
to recover their liberty, and made many bold, but unsuccessful struggles in
that glorious cause. The Ionians particularly, who bore the greatest sway among
them, let no occasion slip which promised the smallest hopes of shaking off the
Persian yoke.

That which favored their designs upon the present occasion, was the
expedition of Darius into Scythia, into which country he sent a numerous army,
laying a bridge over the river Ister for that purpose. The Ionians were
appointed to guard this important pass, but were advised by Miltiades, whom we
shall afterward find performing nobler exploits, to break down the bridge, and
thus cut off the Persian retreat. The Ionians, however, rejected his counsel,
and Darius returned with his army into Europe, where he added Thrace and
Macedon to the number of his conquests.

Histiaeus, the tyrant of Miletos, was the person who opposed the advice of
Miltiades; who, being of an ambitious and intriguing disposition, was willing
to lessen the merit of all his cotemporaries, in order to enhance his own. But
he was deceived in his expectations of success; from these schemes Darius
justly suspecting his fidelity, took him with him to Susa, under pretense of
using his friendship and advice, but in reality of preventing his future
machinations at home. But Histyaeus saw too clearly the cause of his detension,
which he regarded as a specious imprisonment, and therefore took every
opportunity of secretly exciting the Ionians to a revolt, hoping, that himself
might one day be sent to bring them to reason.

Aristagoras was at that time this statesman's deputy at Miletus, and received
the instructions of his master to stir up the Ionian cities to revolt with the
utmost alacrity. In fact, from a late failure of this general upon Naxos, his
credit was ruined at the Persian court, and no other alternative remained for
him but to comply with the advice of Histiaeus in stirring up a revolt, and of
trying to place himself at the head of a new confederacy.

The first step Aristagoras took to engage the affections of the Ionians, was
to throw up his power in Miletus, where he was deputy, and to reinstate that
little place in all its former freedom. He then made a journey through all
Ionia, where, by his example, his credit, and perhaps his menaces, he induced
every other governor to imitate his example. They all complied the more
cheerfully, as the Persian power since the check it had received in Scythia,
was the less able to punish their revolt, or to protect them in their continued
attachment. Having thus united all these little states by the consciousness of
one common offense, he then threw off the mask, declaring himself at the head
of the confederacy, and bid defiance to the power of Persia.

To enable himself to carry on the war with more vigor, he went in the
beginning of the following year to Lacedaemon, in order to engage that state in
his interests, and engage it in a war with a power that seemed every day to
threaten the general liberty of Greece. Cleomenes was at that time king of
Sparta, and to him Aristagoras applied for assistance, in what he represented
as the common cause. He represented to him, that the Ionians and Lacedaemonians
were countrymen; that it would be for the honor of Sparta to concur with him
in the design he had formed of restoring the Ionians to their liberty; that the
Persians were enervated by luxury; that their riches would serve to reward the
conquerors, while nothing was so easy as their overthrow. Considering the
present spirit of the Ionians, it would not be difficult, he said, for the
victorious Spartans to carry their arms even to the gates of Susa, the
metropolis of the Persian empire, and thus give laws to those who presumed to
call themselves the sovereigns of the world. Cleomenes desired time to consider
this proposal; and, being bred up in Spartan ignorance, demanded how far it was
from the Ionian sea to Susa? Aristagoras, without considering the tendency of
the question, answered, that it might be a journey of three months. Cleomenes
made no answer, but turning his back upon so great an adventurer, gave orders
that before sunset he should quit the city. Still, however, Aristagoras
followed him to his house, and finding the inefficacy of his eloquence, tried
what his offers of wealth could do. He at first offered him ten talents, he
then raised the sum to fifteen; and it is unknown what effect such a large sum
might have had upon the Spartan, had not his daughter, a child of nine years
old, who was accidentally present at the proposal, cried out, Fly father, or
this stranger will corrupt you. This advice given in the moment of suspense,
prevailed; Cleomenes refused his bribes, and Aristagoras went to sue at other
cities, where eloquence was more honored, and wealth more alluring.

Athens was a city where he expected a more favorable reception. Nothing could
be more fortunate for his interests than his arrival at the very time they had
received the peremptory message from the Persians to admit their tyrant, or to
fear the consequences of their disobedience. The Athenians were at that time
all in an uproar, and the proposal of Aristagoras met with the most favorable
reception. It was much easier to impose upon a multitude than a single person,
the whole body of citizens engaged immediately to furnish twenty ships to
assist his designs; and to these, the Eretrians and Eubaeans added five more.

Aristagoras, thus supplied, resolved to act with vigor, and having collected
all his forces together, set sail for Ephesus; where, leaving his fleet, he
entered the Persian frontiers, and marched by land to Sardis, the capital city
of Lydia. Artaphernes, who resided there as the Persian viceroy, finding the
city untenable, resolved to secure himself in the citadel, which he knew could
not easily be forced. As most of the houses of this city were built with reeds,
and consequently very combustible, one of the houses being set on fire by an
Ionian soldier, the flames quickly spread to all the rest. Thus the whole town
was quickly reduced to ashes, and numbers of the inhabitants slain. But the
Persians were soon avenged for this unnecessary cruelty, for either recovering
themselves from their former panic, or being reinforced by the Lydians, they
charged the Ionians in a body, and drove them back with great slaughter. Nor
was the pursuit discontinued even as far as Ephesus, where the vanquished and
the victors arriving together, a great carnage ensued, and but a small part of
the routed army escaped, which took shelter aboard the fleet, or in the
neighboring cities. Other defeats followed after this. The Athenians
intimidated with such a commencement of ill-success, could not be persuaded to
continue the war. The Cyprians were obliged once more to submit to the Persian
yoke. The Ionians lost most of their towns one after the other, and Aristagoras
flying into Thrace, was cut off by the inhabitants with all his forces.

In the mean time, Histiaeus, who was the original cause of all these
misfortunes, finding that he began to be suspected in Persia, left that court
under a pretense of going to quell those troubles, which he had all along
secretly fomented, but his duplicity of conduct rendered him now suspicious to
either party. Artaphernes, the Persian viceroy, plainly accused him of
treachery, while his own Milesians refused to admit him as their master. Thus
wavering, uncertain, and not knowing where to turn, having picked up a few
scattered remains of the routed armies, he fell in with Harpagus, one of the
Persian generals, who routed his forces, and made Histiaeus himself a prisoner.
Being sent to Artaphernes, that inhuman commander immediately caused him to be
crucified, and ordered his head to be sent to Darius, who received the present
with that disgust which evidenced his superior humanity. He wept over it with a
friendly sorrow, and ordered that it should receive honorable interment.

In the mean time, the affairs of the Ionian confederacy every day became more
desperate. The Persian generals finding that Miletus was the city which they
chiefly depended on, resolved to march thither with all their forces,
concluding, that having carried that city, all the rest would submit of course.
The Ionians having intelligence of this design, determined in a general
assembly, to make no opposition by land, where the Persians were too powerful;
but to fortify Miletus, and exert all their efforts by sea, where they hoped
for the advantage from their superior skill in naval evolutions. They
accordingly assembled a fleet of three hundred ships at a little island over
against Miletus, and on the superiority of this fleet they placed their whole
reliance. But the Persian gold effected what their arms were unable to compass.
Their emissaries having secretly debauched the greatest part of the
confederates, and engaged them to desert; when the two fleets came to engage,
the ships of Samos, Lesbos, and several other places, sailed off, and returned
to their own country. Thus the remaining part of the fleet, which did not
amount to more than an hundred ships, was quickly overpowered, and almost
totally destroyed.

After this the city of Miletus was besieged, and was easily taken. All the
other cities, as well on the continent as among the islands, were forced to
return to their duty. Those who continued obstinate were treated with great
severity. The handsomest of the young men were chosen to serve in the king's
palace, and the young women were all sent into Persia. Thus ended the revolt of
the Ionians, which continued six years from its first breaking out under
Aristagoras, and this was the third time the Ionians were obliged to undergo
the yoke of foreign dominion, for they inherited a natural love of freedom,
which all the Greeks were known to possess.

The Persians having thus subdued the greatest part of Asia Minor, began to
look toward Europe, as offering conquests worthy their ambition. The
assistance given the Ionians by the Athenian fleet, and the refusal of that
state to admit Hippias as their king, the taking of Sardis, and the contempt
they testified for the Persian power, were all sufficient motives for exciting
the resentment of that empire, and for marking out all Greece for destruction.
Darius, therefore, in the twenty-eighth year of his reign, having recalled all
his other generals, sent Mardonius, the son of Gobryas, a young nobleman who
had lately married one of the king's daughters, to command in chief throughout
all the maritime parts of Asia; and, particularly, to revenge the burning of
Sardis. This was an offense which that monarch seemed peculiarly to resent, and
from the time of that conflagration, he had given orders for one of his
attendants every time he sat down to table, to cry out, remember the Athenians.

Mardonius, willing to second his master's animosity, quickly passed into
Thrace at the head of a large army, and so terrified the inhabitants of that
country, that they yielded implicit obedience to his power. From thence he set
sail for Macedonia, but his fleet attempting to double the Cape of Mount Athos,
in order to gain the coasts of that country, they were attacked by so violent a
tempest, that upwards of three hundred ships were sunk, and above twenty
thousand men perished in the sea. His land army, that took the longest way
about, met, at the same time, with equal distresses. For being encamped in a
place of no security, the Thracians attacked them by night, and made a great
slaughter among the enemy. Mardonius himself was wounded, and finding his army
unable to maintain the field, he returned to the Persian court covered with
grief and confusion, having miscarried both by sea and land.

But the ill success of one or two campaigns was not sufficient to abate the
resentment, or the ardour of the king of Persia. Possessed as he was of
resources almost inexhaustible, wealth without end, and armies that seemed to
increase from defeat, he only grew more determined from every repulse, and
doubled his preparations in proportion to his former failures. He now perceived
that the youth and inexperience of Mardonius were unequal to so great an
undertaking, he, therefore, displaced him, and appointed two generals, Datis, a
Mede, and Artaphernes, the son of him who was late governor of Sardis, in his
stead. His thoughts were earnestly bent on attacking Greece with all his
forces; he wished to take a signal revenge upon Athens, which he considered as
the principal caufe of the late revolt in Ionia: besides, Hippias was still
near him to warm his ambition, and keep his resentment alive. Greece, he said,
was now an object for such a conqueror; the world had long beheld it with an
eye of admiration, and if not soon humbled, it might in time supplant even
Persia in the homage of the world.

Thus excited by every motive of ambition and revenge, Darius resolved to bend
all his attention to a war with Greece. He had in the beginning of his reign
sent spies with one Democedes, a Greek physician, as their conductor, to bring
him information with respect to the strength and situation of all the states of
Greece. This secret deputation failed; he was, therefore, willing once more to
send men under the character of heralds, to denounce his resentment; and, at
the same time, to learn how the different states of the country stood affected
toward him. The form used by the Persians, when they expected submission from
lesser states, was to demand earth and water in the monarch's name, and such as
refused were to be considered as opposers of the Persian power. On the arrival,
therefore, of the heralds amongst the Greeks, many of the cities, dreading the
Persian power, complied with their demands. The Eginetans, with some of the
islands also, yielded up a ready submission, and almost all but Athens and
Sparta were contented to exchange their liberties for safety.

But these two noble republics bravely disdained to acknowledge the Persian
power; they had felt the benefits of freedom, and were resolved to maintain it
to the last. Instead therefore of offering up earth and water as demanded, they
threw the heralds, the one into a well, the other into a ditch, and adding
mockery to insult, desired them to take earth and water from thence. This they
probably did to cut off all hopes of a reconciliation, and to leave no safety
but in perseverance and despair.

Nor were the Athenians content with this outrage, but resolved also to punish
the Aeginetans, who, by a base submission to the Persian power, had betrayed
the common cause of Greece. They accordingly represented the affair to the
Spartans, with all its aggravating circumstances, and heightened with that
eloquence for which they were famous. Before such judges it was not likely that
cowardice or timidity would find many defenders; the Spartans immediately gave
judgment against the people of Aegina, and sent Cleomenes, one of their kings,
to apprehend the authors of so base a concession. The people of Aegina,
however, refused to deliver them, under pretense that Cleomenes came without
his colleague. This colleague was Demaratus, who had himself secretly furnished
them with that excuse. As soon as Cleomenes was returned to Sparta, in order to
be revenged on Demaratus for thus counteracting the demands of his country, he
endeavored to get him deposed, as not being of the royal family. In fact,
Demaratus was born only seven months after marriage, and this was supposed by
many to be a sufficient proof of his bastardy. This accusation, therefore,
being revived, the Pythian oracle was appointed to determine the controversy;
and the priestess being privately suborned by Cleomenes, an answer was given
against his colleague just as he had dictated. Demaratus thus being declared
illegitimate, and unable to endure so gross an injury, banished himself from
his country, and retired to Darius, who received him with great friendship, and
gave him a considerable settlement in Persia. He was succeeded in the throne by
Leotychides, who concurring with the views of Cleomenes, punished the
Aeginetans, by placing ten of their most guilty citizens in the hands of the
Athenians; while Cleomenes, some time after, being detected of having suborned
the priestess, slew himself in a fit of despair.

On the other hand, the Aeginetans complained of the severity of their
treatment, but finding no likelihood of redress, they resolved to obtain that
justice by force which was refused to their supplications. Accordingly, they
intercepted an Athenian ship, which in pursuance of an annual custom ever since
the times of Theseus, was going to Delos to offer sacrifice. This produced a
naval war between these two states; in which, after a variety of fortunes, the
Aeginetans were worsted, and the Athenians possessed themselves of the
sovereignty of the seas. Thus these civil discords, which seemed at first to
favor the designs of the common enemy, turned out to the general advantage of
Greece. For the Athenians thus acquiring great power at sea, were put in a
capacity of facing the Persian fleets, and of cutting off those supplies which
were continually carrying to their armies by land.

In the mean time, the preparations on both sides for a general war, were
carried on with the greatest animosity and dispatch. Darius sent away his
generals, Datis and Artaphernes, whom he had appointed in the room of
Mardonius, to what he supposed a certain conquest. They were furnished with a
fleet of six hundred ships, and an army of an hundred and twenty thousand men;
their instructions were, to give up Athens and Eretria, a little city which had
joined in the league against him, to be plundered; to burn all the houses and
temples of both, and to lead away all the inhabitants into slavery. The country
was to be laid desolate, and the army was provided with a sufficient supply of
chains and fetters for binding the conquered nations.

To oppose this formidable invasion, the Athenians had only their courage,
their animosity, their dread of slavery, their discipline^ and about ten
thousand men. Their civil commotions with the other states of Greece had given
them a spirit of war and stratagem, while the genius of their citizens,
continually excited and exercised, was arrived at its highest pitch, and fitted
them for every danger. Athens had long been refining in all those arts which
qualifies a state to extend, or to enjoy conquest; every citizen was a
statesman and a general, and every soldier considered himself as one of the
bulwarks of his country. But in this little state, from whence first flowed all
these improvements that have since adorned and civilized society, there was at
that time three men who were considered as superiors to all the rest, all
remarkable for their abilities in war, and their integrity in peace, for those
qualifications that can advance the glory of states, or procure the happiness
of the individual.

Of these Miltiades, as being the most experienced, was at that time the most
known. He was the son of Cimon, and nephew of Miltiades, an illustrious
Athenian, who accepted the government of the Dolonci, a people of the Thracian
Chersonesus. Old Miltiades dying without issue, he was succeeded in his
government by Stesagoras his nephew, and he also dying, young Militades was
chosen as his successor. He was appointed to that government the same year that
Darius undertook his unsuccessful expedition against the Scythians. He was
obliged to attend that prince as far as the Ister with what shipping he was
able to supply; but ever eager to throw off the Persian yoke, it was he who
advised the Ionians to destroy the bridge, and leave the army of Darius to its
fate. When the affairs of the continent began to decline, Miltiades, rather
than live in dependence, resolved to return once more to Athens; and thither he
returned with five ships, which were all that remained of his shattered
fortunes.

At the same time, two other citizens, younger than Miltiades, began to
distinguish themselves at Athens, namely, Aristides and Themistocles. These
were of very different dispositions; but from this difference resulted the
greatest advantages to their country. Themistocles was naturally inclined to a
popular government, and omitted nothing that could render him agreeable to the
people, or gain him friends. His complaisance was boundless, and his desire to
oblige sometimes out-stepped the bounds of duty. His partiality was often
conspicuous. Somebody talking with him once on the subject, told him he would
make an excellent magistrate if he had more impartiality: God forbid, replied
he, that I should ever sit upon a tribunal where my friends should find no more
favor than strangers.

Aristides was as remarkable for his justice and integrity. Being a favourer of
aristocracy, in imitation of Lycurgus, he was friendly, but never at the
expense of justice. In seeking honors, he ever declined the interests of his
friends, lest they should, in turn, demand his interest when his duty was to be
impartial. The love of the public good was the great spring of all his actions,
and with that in view no difficulties could daunt him, no success or elevation
exalt. On all occasions he preserved his usual calmness of temper, being
persuaded that he was entirely his country's, and very little his own. One day
when an actor was repeating some lines from Aeschylus on the stage, coming to a
passage which described a man as not desiring to appear honest, but to be so,
the whole audience cast their eyes on Aristides, and applied the passage. In
the administration of public offices, his whole aim was to perform his duty
without any thought of enriching himself.

Such were the characters of the illustrious Athenians that led the councils of
the state when Darius turned his arms against Greece. These inspired their
fellow-citizens with a noble confidence in the justice of their cause, and made
all the preparations against the coming invasion that prudence and deliberate
valor could suggest. In the mean time, Datis and Artaphernes led on their
numerous forces toward Europe; and after having made themselves masters of the
islands in the Aegean sea without any opposition, they turned their course
toward Eretria, that city which had formerly assisted the Ionians in their
revolt. The Eretrians, now driven to the last extremity, saw no hopes of
meeting their enemy in the field, wherefore they sent back four thousand men
that the Athenians had supplied them with, and resolved patiently to stand a
siege. For six days the Persians attempted to storm the city, and were repulsed
with loss; but on the seventh, the city, by the treachery of some of the
principal inhabitants, being betrayed into their hands, they entered,
plundered, and burned it. The inhabitants were put in chains, and sent as the
first fruits of war to the Persian monarch; but he, contrary to their
expectation, treated them with great lenity, and gave them a village in the
country of Cissa for their residence, where Apollonius Tyanaeus found their
descendants six hundred years after.

After such splendid success at Eretria, nothing now remained but the
apparently easy conquest of Greece. Hippias, the expelled tyrant of Athens,
still accompanied the Persian army, and led them by the safest marches into the
heart of the country; at length, flushed with victory and certain of success,
he conducted them to the plains of Marathon, a fertile valley but ten miles
distant from Athens. From thence they sent to summon the citizens, acquainting
them with the fate of Fretria, and informing them that not a single inhabitant
had escaped their vengeance. But the Athenians were not to be intimidated by
any vicinity of danger. They had sent indeed to Sparta to implore succors
against the common enemy, which were granted without deliberation; but the
superstition of the times rendered their assistance ineffectual, for it was an
established law among the Spartans not to begin a march before the full moon.
They applied also to other states, but they were too much awed by the power of
Persia to move in their defense. An army of an hundred and twenty thousand men,
exulting in the midst of their country, was too formidable for a weak and
jealous confederacy to oppose. The inhabitants of Platea alone furnished them
with a thousand soldiers, and they were left to find all other assistance in
their courage and their despair.

In this extremity they were obliged to arm their slaves for the safety of all,
and their forces thus united amounted to but ten thousand men. Hoping therefore
to derive from their discipline what they wanted in power, they placed their
whole army under the conduct of ten generals, of whom Miltiades was chief, and
these each was to have the command of the troops day about in regular
succession. An arrangement in itself so unpromising, was still more embarrassed
by the generals themselves disputing whether they should hazard a battle, or
wait the approach of the enemy within their walls. The latter opinion seemed
for a while to prevail; it was urged that it would be rashness itself to face
so powerful and well appointed an army with an handful of men. It was alleged
that the soldiers would gather courage from their security behind their walls,
and that the forces of Sparta without, might make a diversion in case of a
sally from within. Militades, however, declared for the contrary opinion, and
showed that the only means to exalt the courage of their own troops, and to
strike a terror into those of the enemy, was to advance boldly toward them with
an air of confidence and desperate intrepidity. Aristides also strenuously
embraced this opinion, and exerted all his masculine eloquence to bring over
the rest. The question being put, when the suffrages came to be taken, the
opinions were equal on either side of the argument. It now therefore remained
with Callimachus, the Polemarch, who had a right of voting as well as the ten
commanders, to give his opinion and decide this important debate. It was to him
Miltiades addressed himself with the utmost earnestness, alleging that the
fate of his country was now in his power; that his single vote was to determine
whether his country should be enslaved or free; that his fame might now, by a
single word, be made equal to that of Harmodius and Aristogiton, who were the
authors of Athenian liberty. Thus exhorted, Callimachus did not long debate,
but gave his voice in favor of an open engagement; and Miltiades, thus
seconded, prepared to marshal up his little army for the great encounter.

In the mean time it appeared that so many leaders commanding in succession,
only served to perplex and counteract each other. Aristides perceived that a
command which changes every day, must be incapable of projecting or executing
any uniform design; he therefore gave it as his opinion that it was necessary
to invest the whole power in one single person, and to induce his colleagues to
conform, he himself set the first example of resignation. When the day came on
which it was his turn to command, he resigned it to Miltiades as the more able
and experienced general, while the other commanders, warmed by so generous a
preserence followed his example.

Miltiades thus vested in the supreme command, which was now the post of
highest danger, like an experienced general, endeavored, by the advantage of
his ground, to make up for his deficiency in strength and numbers He was
sensible that by extending his front to oppose the enemy, he must weaken it too
much, and give their dense body the advantage. He therefore drew up his army at
the foot of a mountain, so that the enemy should not surround him or charge him
in the rear. On the flanks on either side he caused large trees to be thrown,
which were cut down for that purpose, and these served to guard him from the
Persian cavalry, that generally wheeled on the flank in the heat of an
engagement.

Datis, on his side, was sensible of this advantageous disposition, but relying
on his superiority of numbers, and unwilling to wait till the Spartan
reinforcements should arrive, he determined to engage. And now was to be fought
the first great battle which the Greeks had ever engaged in. It was not like
any of their former civil contests arising from jealousy and terminating in an
easy accommodation: it was a battle that was to be decided with the greatest
monarch of the earth, with the most numerous army that had been hitherto seen
in Europe. This was an engagement that was to decide the liberty of Greece,
and, what was of infinitely greater moment, the future progress of refinement
among mankind. Upon the event of this battle depended the complexion which the
manners of the West were hereafter to assume, whether they were to adopt
Asiatic customs with their conquerors, or to go on in modelling themselves upon
Grecian refinements, as was afterward the case. This theresore may be
considered as one of the most important battles that ever was fought, and the
event was as little to be expected as the success was glorious.

The signal was no sooner given than the Athenians, without waiting the Persian
onset, rushed in upon their ranks with desperate rapidity, as if wholly
regardless of safety. The Persians regarded this first step of the Athenians as
the result of madness, and were more inclined to despise them as maniacs, than
oppose them as soldiers. However, they were quickly undeceived. It had never
before been the custom of the Greeks to run on with this headlong valor; but
comparing the number of their own forces with that of the enemy, and expecting
safety only from rashness, they determined to break through the enemies ranks
or fall in the attempt. The greatness of their danger added to their courage,
and despair did the rest. The Persians, however, stood their ground with great
intrepidity, and the battle was long, fierce, and obstinate. Miltiades had made
the wings of his army exceeding strong, but had left the main body more weak
and not so deep, for having but ten thousand men to oppose to such a numerous
army, he supposed the victory could be obtained by no other means than
strengthening his flanks, not doubting but when his wings were once victorious,
they would be able to wheel upon the enemies main body on either side, and thus
put them easily to the rout. The Persians, therefore, finding the main body
weakest, attacked it with their utmost vigor. It was in vain that Aristides
and Themistocles, who were stationed in this post of danger, endeavored to
keep their troops to the charge. Courage and intrepidity were unable to resist
the torrent of increasing numbers, so that they were at last obliged to give
ground. But in the mean time the wings were victorious, and now, just as the
main body was fainting under the unequal encounter, these came up and gave them
time to recover their strength and order. Thus the scale of victory quickly
began to turn in their favor, and the Persians, from being the aggressors, now
began to give ground in turn, and being unsupported by fresh forces, they fled
to their ships with the utmost precipitation. The confusion and disorder was
now universal, the Athenians followed them to the beach and sat many of their
ships on fire. On this occasion it was that Cyndaeyrus, the brother of the poet
Aeschylus, seized with his hand one of the ships that the enemy was pushing off
from the shore. The Persians, within seeing themselves thus arrested, cut off
his right hand that held the prow, he then laid hold of it with his left, which
they also cut off, at last he seized it with his teeth, and in that manner
expired.

Seven of the enemies ships were taken, above six thousand Persians were slain,
without reckoning those who were drowned in the sea as they endeavored to
escape, or those who were consumed when the ships were set on fire. Of the
Greeks not above two hundred men were killed, among whom was Callimachus, who
gave his vote for bringing on the engagement. Hippias, who was the chief
incendiary of the war, is also thought to have fallen in this battle, though
some say he escaped and died miserably at Lemnos.

Such was the famous battle of Marathon, which the Persians were so sure of
gaining, that they had brought marble into the field in order to erect a trophy
there. Just after the battle an Athenian soldier, whose name was Eucles, still
covered all over with blood and wounds, quitted the army and ran to Athens to
carry his fellow-citizens the news of the victory. His strength just sufficed
to reach the city, and throwing himself into the door of the first house he
met, he uttered three words, Rejoice, we triumph, and instantly expired.

While a part of the army marched forward to Athens, to protect it from the
attempts of the enemy, Aristides remained upon the field of battle to guard the
spoil and the prisoners; and although gold and silver were scattered about the
enemy's deserted camp in abundance, though their tents and galleys were full of
rich furniture and sumptuous apparel, he would not permit any of it to be
embezzled, but reserved it as a common reward for all who had any share in
obtaining the victory. Two thousand Spartans also, whose laws would not permit
them to march until the full of the moon, now came into the field, but the
action being over the day before, they only had an opportunity of paying due
honors to those who gained so glorious a victory, and to bring back the news
to Sparta. Of the marble which the Persians had brought with them, the
Athenians made a trophy, being carved by Phidias into a statue, in honor of
the goddess Nemesis, who had a temple near the field of battle.

In the mean time, the Persian fleet, instead of sailing directly back to Asia,
made an attempt to surprise Athens before the Greek forces could arrive from
Marathon. But the latter had the precaution to move directly thither, and
performed their march with so much expedition, that though it was forty miles
from Marathon, they arrived there in one day. In this manner the Greeks not
only repelled their enemies, but confirmed their security. By this victory the
Grecians were taught to know their own strength, and not to tremble before an
enemy terrible only in name. This taught them through the whole of succeeding
ages to imitate their ancestors with an ardent emulation, and inspired them
with a wish of not degenerating from the Grecian glory. Those Athenians that
were slain in battle had all the honor immediately paid them that was due to
their merit. Illustrious monuments were erected to them all in the very place
where the battle was fought, upon which their names, and the tribe to which
they belonged, were inscribed. There were three distinct sets of monuments set
up; one for the Athenians, one for the Plataeans, and a third for the slaves
who had been enrolled into their troops upon that urgent occasion.

But their gratitude to Miltiades spoke a nobleness of mind, that far surpassed
expensive triumphs, or base adulation. Sensible that his merits were too great
for money to repay, they caused a picture to be painted by Polygnotus, one of
their most celebrated artists, where Miltiades was represented at the head of
the ten commanders exhorting the soldiers, and setting them an example of their
duty. This picture was preserved for many ages, with other paintings of the
best masters, in the portico where Zeno afterward instituted his school of
philosophy. An emulation seemed to take place in every rank of life; Polygnotus
valued himself so much upon the honor of being appointed to paint this
picture, that he gave his labor for nothing. In return for such generosity,
the Amphyctions appointed him a public lodging in the city where he might
reside during pleasure. A. M. 3514.


But though the gratitude of the Athenians to Miltiades was very sincere, yet
was it of no long continuance. This fickle and jealous people, naturally
capricious, and now more than ever careful of preserving their freedom, were
willing to take every opportunity of mortifying a general, from whose merit
they had much to fear. Being appointed with seventy ships to punish those
islands that had favored the Persian invasion, and having raised the siege of
Paros, upon a false report of the arrival of the enemy's fleet, he returned
unsuccessfully to Athens, where he was accused by one Xanthippus, of having
taken a bribe from Persia. As he was not in a condition to answer this charge,
being confined to his bed by a fall he received at Paros; the accusation took
place against him, and he was condemned to lose his life. The manner of
executing criminals found guilty of great offenses, was by throwing them into
the Barathrum, a deep pit, from whence none were ever seen to return. This
sentence was pronounced against him, but his former services were such, as to
have this punishment commuted into a penalty of fifty talents, the sum which it
had cost the state in fitting out the late unsuccessful expedition. Not being
rich enough to pay this sum, he was thrown into prison, where the bruise on his
thigh growing worse, from bad air and confinement, it turned at last to a
gangrene, and put an end to his life and misfortunes.

Cimon, his son, who was at this time very young, signalized his piety on this
occasion. As this ungrateful city would not permit the body of Miltiades to be
buried until all his debts were paid, this young man employed all his interest
among his friends, and strained his utmost credit to pay the fine, and procured
his father's body an honorable interment.

CHAP. IV. From the Death of MILTIADES to the Retreat of XERXES out of Greece.
THE misfortunes of Darius only served to increase his resentment, and give
spirit to his perseverance. Finding the ill success of his generals, he
resolved to try the war in person, and dispatched orders throughout his whole
dominions for fresh preparations. However, a revolt in Egypt for a while
averted his resentment, a contest among his sons about nominating his successor
still farther retarded his designs; and, at last, when he had surmounted every
obstacle, and was just preparing to take a signal vengeance, his death put an
end to all his projects, and gave Greece a longer time for preparation.

Xerxes, his son, succeeded, who, with the empire, inherited also his father's
animosity against Greece. Having carried on a successful expedition against
Egypt, he expected the same good fortune in Europe. Confident of victory, he
did not choose, he said, for the future to buy the figs of Attica; he would
possess himself of the country, and thus have figs of his own. But, before he
engaged in an enterprise of that importance, he thought proper to assemble his
council, and collect the opinions of the principal officers of his court. In
his speech at opening the council, he evidently showed his desire of revenge,
and his passion for military glory. The best way, therefore, to pay court to
this young monarch, was by flattering him in his favorite pursuits, and giving
his impetuous aims the air of studied designs. Mardonius, grown neither wiser
nor less ambitious by his own bad success, began by extolling Xerxes above all
other kings that had gone before. He urged the indispensible necessity of
avenging the dishonor done to the Persian name; he represented the Greeks as
cowards, that were accidently successful, and was firmly of opinion, that they
would never more stand even the hazard of a battle. A discourse that so nearly
conincided with his own sentiments, was very pleasing to the young monarch, and
the rest of the company by their looks, and their silence, seemed to applaud
his impetuosity. But Artabanus, the king's uncle, who had long learned to
reverence courage even in an enemy, and presuming upon his age and experience,
to speak his real sentiments, rose with an honest freedom to represent the
intended expedition in its true light. "Permit me, sir, said he, to deliver my
sentiments upon this occasion with a liberty suitable to my age and your
interest. When Darius, your father, and my brother, first thought of making war
against the Scythians, I used all my endeavors to divert him from it. The
people you are going to attack are infinitely more formidable than they. If the
Athenians alone could defeat the numerous army commanded by Datis and
Artaphernes, what ought we to expect from an opposition of all the states of
Greece united? You design to pass from Asia into Europe, by laying a bridge
over the sea. But what if the Athenians should advance and destroy this bridge,
and so prevent our return? Let us not expose ourselves to such dangers, as we
have no sufficient motives to compel us to face them; at least let us take time
to reflect upon it. When we have maturely deliberated upon an affair, whatever
happens to be the success of it, we have nothing to regret. Precipitation is
imprudent, and is usually unsuccessful. Above all, do not suffer yourself,
great prince, to be dazzled with the splendour of imaginary glory. The highest
and the most lofty trees have the most reason to dread the thunder. God loves
to humble the ostentatious, and reserves to himself alone the pride of
importance. As for you, Mardonius, who so earnestly urge this expedition, if it
must be so, lead it forward. But let the king, whose life is dear to us all,
return back to Persia. In the mean time, let your children and mine be given up
as a pledge to answer for the success of the war. If the issue be favorable, I
consent that mine be put to death, but if it prove otherwise, as I well
foresee, then I desire that you and your children may meet the reward of
rashness."

This advice, which was rather sincere than palatable, was received by Xerxes
with a degree of rage and resentment. "Thank the Gods, cried he, that thou art
my father's brother; were it not for that thou should this moment meet the
just reward of thy audacious behavior. But you shall have your punishment;
remain here behind among the women; these you but too much resemble in your
cowardice and fear. Stay here while I march at the head of my troops where my
duty and glory call me." Upon cooler thoughts, however, Xerxes seemed better
reconciled to his uncle's opinion. When the first emotions of his anger were
over, and he had time to reflect on his pillow upon the different counsels that
were given him, he confessed the rashness of his former rebuke, and ingenuously
ascribed it to heat of youth and the ardour of passion. He offered to come over
to his opinion, at the same time assuring the council, that from his dreams he
had every encouragement to proceed with the expedition. So much condescension
on the one hand, and such favorable omens on the other, determined the whole
council to second his inclinations. They fell prostrate before him, eager to
show their subm^ssion and their joy. A monarch thus surrounded by flatterers,
all striving which should most gratify his pride and passions, could not long
continue good, though naturally inclined to virtue. Xerxes therefore seems a
character thus ruined by power, exerting his natural justice and wisdom at
short intervals, but then giving way to the most culpable and extravagant
excesses. Thus the counsel of Arrabanes being rejected, and that of Mardonius
favorably received, the most extensive preparations were made for carrying on
the war.

The greatness of these preparations seemed to show the high sense which the
Persians had of their enemy. Xerxes, that he might omit nothing conducive to
success, entered into an alliance with the Carthaginians, who were, at that
time, the most potent people of the West; with whom it was stipulated, that
while the Persian forces should attack Greece, the Carthaginians should awe the
Greek colonies, dispersed over the Mediterranean, from coming to their
assistance. Thus having drained all the East to compose his own army, and the
West to supply that of the Carthaginians under Amilcar, he set out from Susa in
order to enter upon this war, A. M. 3523.
ten years after the battle of Marathon.

Sardis was the place where the various nations that were compelled to his
banner were to assemble. His fleet was to advance along the coasts of Asia
Minor toward the Hellespont. But as in doubling the cape of Mount Athos many
shipwrecks were sustained, he was resolved to cut a passage through that neck
of land which joined the mountain to the continent, and thus give his shipping
a shorter and safer passage. This canal was a mile and a half long, and
hollowed out from a high mountain; it required immense labor to perform so
great a work, but his numbers and his ambition were sufficient to surmount all
difficulties. To urge on the undertaking the faster, he treated his laborers
with the greatest severity, while with all the ostentation of an Eastern prince
he gave his commands to the mountain to sink before him: Athos, thou proud
aspiring mountain, that liftest up thy head unto the heavens, be not so
audacious as to put obstacles in my way. If thou give them that opposition, I
will cut thee level to the plain, and throw thee headlong into the sea.

As this monarch passed on in his march to the place of general destination, he
went through Cappadocia, crossed the river Halys, and came to Calene, a city of
Phrygia, near the source of the river Meander. He was there met by Pythias, a
Lydian prince, who, by the most extreme parsimony and oppression, had become,
next to Xerxes, the most opulent man in all the Persian empire. His treasures,
however, were not sufficient to buy off the attendance of his eldest son, whom
he requested might be permitted to remain with him, as he was old and helpless.
He had before offered his money, which amounted to about four millions
sterling, for the monarch's use; but this Xerxes had refused, and now, finding
the young prince willing to remain with his father, he was so enraged that he
commanded him to be put to death before his father's eyes. Then causing the
dead body to be cut in two, and one part of it to be placed on the right, and
the other on the left, he made the whole army pass between them to terrify them
from a reluctance to engage by his example.

From Phrygia Xerxes marched to Sardis, and, in the opening of spring, directed
his march down toward the Hellespont, where his fleet lay in all their pomp,
expecting his arrival. Here being arrived, he was desirous of taking a survey
of all his forces, which composed an army which was never equalled either
before or since. It was composed of the most powerful nations of the East, and
of people scarce known to posterity except by name. The remotest India
contributed its supplies, while the coldest tracts of Scythia sent their
assistance. Medes, Persians, Bactrians, Lydians, Assyrians, Hyrcanians, and an
hundred other countries of various forms, complexions, languages, dresses, and
arms. The land army, which he brought out of Asia, consisted of seventeen
hundred thousand foot, and fourscore thousand horse. Three hundred thousand
more that were added upon crossing the Hellespont, made all his land forces
together amount to above two millions of men. His fleet when it set out from
Asia, consisted of twelve hundred and seven vessels, each carrying two hundred
men. The Europeans augmented his fleet with an hundred and twenty vessels, each
of which carried two hundred men. Besides these there were two thousand smaller
vessels fitted for carrying provisions and stores; the men contained in these,
with the former, amounted to six hundred thousand, so that the whole army might
be said to amount to two millions and an half, which, with the women, slaves,
and futtlers, always accompanying a Persian army, might make the whole above
five millions of souls: a number, if rightly conducted, capable of overturning
the greatest monarchy, but being commanded by presumption and ignorance, they
only served to obstruct and embarrass each other.

Lord of so many and such various subjects, Xerxes found a pleasure in
reviewing his forces, and was desirous of beholding a naval engagement, of
which he had not hitherto been a spectator. To this end a throne was erected
for him upon an eminence, and in that situation beholding all the earth covered
with his troops, and all the sea crowded with his vessels, he felt a secret joy
diffuse itself through his frame from the consciousness of his own superior
power. But all the workings of this monarch's mind were in extreme, a sudden
sadness soon took place of his pleasure, and dissolving in a shower of tears,
he gave himself up to a reflection that not one of so many thousand would be
alive a hundred years after.

Artabanus, who neglected no opportunity of moralizing upon every occurrence,
took this occasion to discourse with him upon the shortness and miseries of
human life. Finding this more distant subject attended to, he spoke more
closely to the present occasion, insinuated his doubts of the success of the
expedition; urged the many inconveniences the army had to suffer, if not from
the enemy, at least from their own numbers. He alleged, that plagues, famine,
and confusion, were the necessary attendants of such ungovernable multitudes by
land, and that empty fame was the only reward of success. But it was now too
late to turn this young monarch from his purpose. Xerxes informed his monitor
that great actions were always attended with proportionable danger, and that if
his predecessors had observed such scrupulous and timorous rules of conduct,
the Persian empire would never have attained to its present height of glory.

Xerxes, in the mean time, had given orders for building a bridge of boats
across the Hellespont for the transporting his army into Europe. This narrow
straight, which now goes by the name of the Dardanels, is near an English mile
over. But soon after the completion of this work, a violent storm arising, the
whole was broken and destroyed, and the labor was to be undertaken anew. The
fury of Xerxes upon this disappointment was attended with equal extravagance
and cruelty. His vengeance knew no bounds; the workmen who had undertaken the
task, had their heads struck off by his order; and that the sea itself also
might know its duty, he ordered it to be lashed as a delinquent, and a pair of
fetters to be thrown into it to curb its future irregularities. Thus having
given vent to his absurd resentment, two bridges were ordered to be built in
the place of the former, one for the army to pass over, and the other for the
baggage and the beasts of burden. The workmen, now warned by the fate of their
predecessors, undertook to give their labors greater stability, they placed
three hundred and sixty vessels across the straight, some of them having three
banks of oars, and others fifty oars a piece. They then cast large anchors into
the water on both sides, in order to fix these vessels against the violence of
the winds, and the current. They then drove large piles into the earth, with
huge rings fastened to them, to which were tied six vast cables which went over
each of the two bridges. Over all these they laid trunks of trees, cut
purposely for that use, and flat boats again over them fastened and joined
together, so as to serve for a floor or solid bottom. When the whole work was
thus completed, a day was appointed for their passing over, and as soon as the
first rays of the sun began to appear, sweet odours of all kinds were
abundantly scattered over the new work, and the way was strewed with myrtle. At
the same time Xerxes poured out libations into the sea, and turning his face
toward the East, worshipped that bright luminary which is the god of the
Persians. Then, throwing the vessel which had held his libation into the sea,
together with a golden cup and Persian scymetar, he went forward and gave
orders for the army to follow. This immense train were no less than seven days
and seven nights passing over, while those who were appointed to conduct the
march quickened the troops by lashing them along, for the soldiers of the East,
at that time and to this very day, are treated like slaves.

Thus this immense army having landed in Europe, and being joined by the
several nations of Europe that acknowledged the Persian power, Xerxes prepared
for marching directly forward into Greece. Beside the generals of every nation,
who each of them commanded the troops of their respective countries, the land
army was commanded by six Persian generals, to whom all the rest were
subordinate. These were Mardonius, Tirintatechmus, Smerdonus, Massistus,
Gergis, and Megabyzus. Ten thousand Persians, who were called the Immortal
Band, were commanded by Hydarnes, while the cavalry and the fleet had their own
respective commanders. Beside those who were attached to Xerxes from principle,
there were some Greek princes, who, either from motives of interest or fear,
followed him in this expedition. Among these were Artemisia, queen of
Hallicarnassus, who, after the death of her husband, governed the kingdom for
her son. She had brought in^eed but the trifling succor of five ships, but she
had made ample amends by her superior prudence, courage, and conduct. Of this
number also was Demaratus, the exiled king of Sparta, who, resenting the
indignity put upon him by his subjects, took refuge in the Persian court, an
indignant spectator of its luxuries and slavish submission. Being one day asked
by Xerxes if he thought the Grecians would dare to await his approach, or would
venture an engagement with armies that drank up whole rivers in their march.
Alas, great prince, cried Demaratus, Greece, from the beginning of time, has
been trained up and accustomed to poverty; but the defects of that are amply
recompensed by virtue, which wisdom cultivates, and the laws support in vigor.
As for the Lacedaemonians, as they have been bred up in freedom, they can never
submit to be slaves. Though all the rest of the Greeks should forsake them,
though they should be reduced to a band of a thousand man, yet still they would
face every danger to preserve what they hold dearer than life. They have laws
which they obey with more implicit reverence than your subjects are obeyed by
you. By these laws they are forbid to fly in battle, and they have only the
alternative to conquer or to die." Xerxes was not offended with the liberty of
Demaratus, but, smiling at his blunt sincerity, ordered his army to march
forward, while he had directed his fleet to follow him along the coast, and to
regulate their course by his motions.

In this manner he pursued his course without any interruption, every nation
near which he approached sending him all the marks of homage and subjection.
Wherever he came he found provisions and refreshments prepared beforehand,
pursuant to the orders he had given. Every city he arrived at, exhausted itself
in giving him the most magnificent reception. The vast expense of these feasts
gave a poor Thracian an opportunity of remarking, that it was a peculiar favor
of the gods that Xerxes could eat but one meal a day. Thus did he continue his
march through Thrace, Macedonia, and Thessaly, every knee bending before him
till he came to the streights of Thermopylae, where he first found an army
prepared to dispute his passage.

This army was a body of Spartans, led on by Leonidas their king, who had been
sent thither to oppose him. As soon as it was known in Greece that Xerxes was
preparing to invade that country, and that an army of millions were coming on
with determined resolution to ruin it, every state seemed differently affected
in proportion to its strength, its courage, or its situation. The Sicilians
refused their aid, being kept in awe by Amilcar the Carthaginian. The
Corcyreans pretended that they were wind-bound, and would not let their ships
stir from the harbor. The Cretans, having consulted the Delphic oracle,
absolutely determined to remain inactive. The Thessalians and Macedonians, from
their situation, were obliged to submit to the conqueror, so that no states
were found bold enough to face this formidable army but Athens and Lacedaemon.
These states had received intelligence of the Persian designs from Demaratus,
long before they had been put into execution. They had also sent spies to
Sardis, in order to have a more exact information of the number and quality of
the enemy's forces. The spies indeed were seized, but Xerxes ordered them to be
conducted through his army, and to give an exact account of what they had seen
at their return. They had sent deputies to all the neighboring states to
awaken their ardour, to apprise them of their danger, and to urge the necessity
of fighting for their common safety. But all their remonstrances were vain;
fear, assuming the name of prudence, offered frivolous excuses, or terms which
were inadmissible. Relying therefore on their own strength, these generous
states resolved to face the danger with joint forces, and conquer or fall in
the cause of freedom. Having summoned a general council at the Isthmus, they
there solemnly resolved to wave all private quarrels or pretensions, and join
against the common danger.

One cannot, without astonishment, reflect on the intrepidity of the Greeks,
who determined to face the innumerable army of Xerxes with such disproportioned
forces. All their forces joined together amounted only to eleven thousand two
hundred men. But they were all soldiers, bred amidst fatigue and danger, all
determined to a man either to conquer or die. Their first care, however, was to
appoint a general. It was then that the most able and experienced captains,
terrified at the danger' had taken the resolution of not presenting themselves
as candidates. Epicydes indeed, a man of ignorance, avarice, and presumption,
was ready to lead them on, and, under his guidance, nothing could be hoped for
but confusion and disappointment. In this pressing juncture, therefore,
Themistocles, conscious of his own capacity, and warmed with a love of glory,
which was great in proportion to the danger, resolved to use every art to get
himself appointed to the command. For this purpose he used all his interest,
and even distributed bribes to remove his competitor, and having gratified the
avarice of Epycides, which was his ruling passion, he soon found himself
appointed to the command, which was the darling object of his ambition.

But in this pressing exigence it was incumbent on the Athenians to avail
themselves of every person that might be serviceable, however obnoxious he
might appear to their resentment. There were many useful citizens whom they
had, upon some factious discontents, sent into banishment, and these they now
repentingly wished to restore. Among this number was Aristides, that brave and
just man, who had, at the battle of Marathon, and upon other occasions, been
instrumental in gaining their victories, and who had, upon all occasions,
improved them by the disinterestedness and integrity of his example. This
magistrate having had many contests with Themistocles, who was his rival in
power and same, and always wished to supplant him, was at length condemned to
go into banishment by the power of his prevailing faction. It was on that
occasion that a peasant, who could not write, and did not know Aristides
personally, applied to himself, and desired him to write the name of Aristides
upon the shell by which his vote was given against him. "Has he done you any
wrong, said Aristides, that you are for condemning him in this manner." " No,
replied the peasant, but I hate to hear him praised for his justice."
Aristides, without saying a word more, calmly took the shell, wrote down his
own name upon it, and contentedly retired into banishment. But the present
distresses of his country were now an object that strongly solicited his
return. Even Themistocles, his rival, was so far from remembering his old
resentments, that he now ardently desired the assistance of his counsel, and
gave up all his private resentments to the good of the state. The hatred of
these great men had nothing in it of that bitter and implacable spirit which
prevailed among the Romans in the latter times of the republic, or perhaps the
desperate situation of their country might only occupy their thoughts at that
time.

But the preparations by land alone were not sufficient to repel the growing
danger. If the Greeks had trusted to their land armies without further succor,
they must have been undone. Themistocles, who saw that the victory of Marathon
must be followed by many more before safety could be ascertained, had prudently
caused an hundred galleys to be built, and turned all his thoughts to give
Athens a superiority at sea. The oracle had declared some time before that
Athens should only defend herself with wooden walls, and he took the advantage
of that ambiguity to persuade his countrymen, that by such walls was only meant
her shipping. He had the address to procure some money annually coming in from
silver mines, which the Athenians had in their district, to the purposes of
equipping and manning this fleet, and now, upon the approach of Xerxes, the
confederates found themselves at the head of a very powerful squadron of two
hundred and eighty sail, the command of which was conferred upon Eurybrades, a
Lacedaemonian.

All measures being taken that this brave confederacy could devise, it next
remained to settle in what place they should first meet the Persians in the
field, in order to dispute their entrance into Greece. The people of Thessaly
represented that as they were most exposed and first liable to be attacked by
the enemy, it was but reasonable that their security should be the first object
of attention. The Greeks, willing to protect all who would declare in their
quarrel, in pursuance of this request, resolved to send their chief forces to
guard the passage which separates Macedonia from Thessaly, near the river
Peneus. But Alexander, the son of Amyntas, representing that post as untenable,
they were obliged to change their measures, and at last resolved to send a body
of men to guard the pass at Thermopylae where a few were capable of acting
against numbers.

Thermopylae was a narrow pass of twenty-five feet broad, between Thessaly and
Phocis, defended by the remains of a wall, with gates to it, formerly built by
the Phocians, to secure them against the incursions of their neighboring
enemy. From these gates, and some hot baths, which were at the entrance into
the pass, the straight had its name. This was pitched upon, as well for the
narrowness of the way, as for its vicinity to the sea, from whence the land
forces could occasionally receive assistance from the fleet. The command of
this important pass was given to Leonidas, one of the kings of Sparta, who led
thither a body of six thousand men. Of these, three hundred were Spartans, the
rest consisting of Baeotians, Corinthians, Phocians, and Arcadians, all such as
in the present exigency were prepared for the field, and were not afraid of the
numbers of the enemy. Each of these had particular commanders of their own, but
Leonidas had the conduct of the whole. But though the determined resolution of
these troops was incapable of being shaken, little was expected from the nature
of their destination. They were all along taught to look upon themselves as a
forelorn hope, only placed there to check the progress of the enemy, and give
them a foretaste of the desperate valor of Greece; nor were even oracles
wanting to check their ardour. It had been declared, that to procure the safety
of Greece it was necessary that a king, one of the descendants of Hercules,
should die. This task was cheerfully undertaken by Leonidas; and, as he marched
out from Lacedaemon, he considered himself as a willing victim offered up for
the good of his country: however, he joyfully put himself at the head of his
little band, took possession of his post, and with deliberate desperation
waited at Thermopylae for the coming up of the Persian army.

Xerxes, in the mean time, approaching with his numerous army, flushed with
success, and confident of victory. His camp exhibited all the marks of eastern
magnificence and Asiatic luxury. He expected to meet no obstruction on his way
to Greece; he led on his forces rather to terrify the enemy than to fight them;
great, therefore, was his surprise, to find that a few desperate men were
determined to dispute his passage. He had all along flattered himself, that on
the first hearing of his arrival, the Grecians would betake themselves to
flight, nor could he ever be persuaded to believe what Demaratus had assured
him, that at the first pass he came to, his whole army would be put to a stand.
He himself took a view of their camp and entrenchments. The Lacedaemonians were
some of them calmly amusing themselves with military exercises, others with
combing their long hair. He enquired the reason of this conduct, and he was
informed, that it was the Spartan manner of preparing themselves for battle.
Still, however, entertaining some hopes of their flight, he waited four days to
give them time to reflect on the greatness of their danger, but they still
continued gay and unconcerned, as men who regarded death as the end of labor.
He sent to them to deliver up their arms. Leonidas, with truly Spartan
contempt, desired him to come and take them. He offered, if they would lay down
their arms, to receive them as friends, and to give them a country much larger
and better than what they fought for. No country, they replied, was worth
acceptance, unless won by virtue; and that for their arms, they should want
them, whether as his friends or enemies. Upon this, the monarch addressed
himself to Demaratus, asking, if these desperate men could expect to outrun
his horses? Demaratus answered, that they would fight it out to the last, and
not a man of them would survive his country's freedom. Some men were heard to
say, that the Persians were so numerous, that their darts would darken the sun.
Dieneces, a Spartan, replied, Then we shall fight in the shade.

Xerxes, thus treated with contempt, at length ordered a body of Medes to
advance, desiring such as had lost any of their relations at the battle of
Marathon, to take their revenge upon the present occasion. Accordingly they
began the onset, but were repulsed with great loss. The number of the
assailants only served to increase their confusion, and it now began to appear
that Xerxes had many followers, but few soldiers. These forces being routed by
the Grecian troops, the Persian Immortal Band was brought up, consisting of ten
thousand men, to oppose them. But these were as unsuccessful as the former. The
charge was renewed the next day, Xerxes endeavoring to inspire his troops with
the promises of reward, since he found they were dead to the sense of shame.
But though their charge was violent, it was unsupported, and the Greeks
standing closely connected in a body, withstood the shock, and filled the way
with Persian carcasses. During these unsuccessful assaults, Xerxes was a
spectator, sitting upon his throne, placed upon an eminence, and directing the
order of battle, impetuous in his pride and resentment, and now and then seen
to leap from his seat when he beheld his troops in confusion, or offering to
give way.

Thus did the Greeks keep their ground for two days, and no power on earth
seemed capable of removing them from their advantageous station. Xerxes, out of
all hopes of being able to force a passage, appeared under the greatest
consternation; but he was relieved from his embarrassment by the appearance of
Epialtes, a Trachinian, who had deserted from the enemy, and undertook to show
his troops a secret path that led through the defiles of the mountains, and
through which a body of forces might be led to fall upon the Grecians in the
rear. He quickly, therefore, dispatched a body of twenty thousand men thither,
who marching all night, arrived at the break of day at the top of the mountain,
and possessed themselves of that advantageous post.

The Greeks were soon apprised of this misfortune, and Leonidas seeing that his
post was no longer tenable, advised the troops of his allies to retire, and
reserve themselves for better times, and the future safety of Greece. As for
himself, and his fellow Spartans, they were obliged by their laws not to fly;
that he owed a life to his country, and that it was now his duty to fall in its
defense. Thus, having dismissed all but his three hundred Spartans, with some
Thespians and Thebans, in all not a thousand men, he exhorted his followers in
the most cheerful manner to prepare for death. Come, my fellow soldiers, says
he, lets us dine cheerfully here, for tonight we shall sup with Pluto. His men
upon hearing his determined purpose, set up a loud shout, as if they had been
invited to a banquet, and resolved every man to sell his life as dearly as he
could. The night now began to advance, and this was thought the most glorious
opportunity of meeting death in the enemy's camp, where the silence would
favor desperation, and hide the smallness of their numbers. Thus resolved,
they made directly to the Persian tents, and, in the darkness of the night, had
almost reached the royal pavilion, with hopes of surprising the king. The
obscurity added much to the horror of the scene, and the Persians falling upon
each other without distinction, rather assisted the Grecians than defended
themselves. Thus success seemed to crown the rashness of their enterprise,
until the morning beginning to dawn, the light discovered the smallness of
their numbers. They were soon, therefore, surrounded by the Persian forces,
who, fearing to fall in upon them, flung their javelins from every quarter,
till the Greeks, not so much conquered, as tired with conquering, fell amidst
heaps of the slaughtered enemy, leaving behind them an example of intrepidity
never known before. Leonidas was one of the first that fell, and the endeavors
of the Lacedaemonians to defend his dead body were incredible. It was found
after the battle, buried under a mountain of the dead, and was nailed to a
cross, by way of infamy, by the brutal victor. Of all the train, two only
escaped, whose names were Aristodemus and Panites. The latter, upon his return
to Sparta, was branded with infamy, and treated with such contempt, that he
killed himself. Aristodemus reserved himself for another occasion, and by his
bravery at the battle of Platea recovered that honor which he had lost. Some
time after this transaction the Amphyctions ordered a magnificent monument to
be erected over these brave defenders of their country, and Simonides, the
poet, wrote their epitaph.

Xerxes in this battle is said to have lost twenty thousand men, among which
were two of his brothers. But to conceal the greatness of his loss from the
army, he caused all but a thousand of those that were slain, to be buried in
holes indiscriminately; however, this stratagem had very bad success, for when
the soldiers of his fleet were curious some time after in taking a survey of
the field of battle, they discovered the artifice, and urged it as an act of
flagrant impiety against him.

Dismayed at an obstinacy in the enemy that cost him so dear, Xerxes was for
some time more inclined to try his fortune at sea, than to proceed immediately
into the country, where he had learned from Demaratus, that eight thousand
Spartans, such as he had but lately fought with, were ready to receive him.
Accordingly, the very day of the battle of Thermopylae, there was an engagement
at sea between the two fleets. The Grecian fleet consisted of two hundred and
seventy-one vessels. That of the enemy had lately lost four hundred vessels in
a shipwreck, but was still greatly superior to the fleet of the Grecians. To
repair this loss by a victory, two hundred Persian vessels had orders to take a
compass and surprise the Grecians lying in the streights of Eubaea, but the
Grecians being apprized of their designs, set sail by night, and so, by a
counter-surprize, fell in with them while they were thus separated from their
main squadron, took and sunk thirty, forced the rest to sea, and there, by
stress of weather, they were all soon after either sunk or stranded. Enraged at
these disappointments, the Persians bore down the next day with their whole
fleet, and drawing up in form of an half moon, made an offer of battle, which
the Greeks as readily accepted. The Athenians, having been reinforced with
three and sisty sail, the battle was very obstinate and bloody, and the success
pretty near equal on both sides, so that both parties seemed content to retire
in good order.

All these actions which passed near Artemisa, though at that time indecisive,
yet served not a little to animate and inspire the Athenians, who were now
taught to think that there was nothing either formidable in the numbers, or
useful in the size of the Persian ships. Thus strengthening themselves with the
hopes of more splendid engagements, they sailed away from Artemisa and stopped
at Salamis, where they might most conveniently assist the Athenians.

In the mean time Xerxes having entered with his numerous army into the country
of Phocis, burning and plundering every town through which he passed. The
inhabitants of Peloponnesus, who were naturally defended by their inaccessible
situation, as their country was joined to the continent only by a neck of land,
thought it the most prudent way to defend the isthmus by a wall, to take
shelter behind that rampart, and to leave the rest of Greece to the mercy of
the conqueror. The Athenians, however, whose country lay without the Isthmus,
remonstrated loudly against this desertion, and endeavored to persuade the
Greeks to face the enemy in the plain. But prudence prevailed, and Themistocles
gave them to understand that though their country should be for a while
overrun by the barbarous invader, yet they had still their wooden walls to
rely on, for their fleet was ready to transport them to such of their
settlements as they thought proper. At first, however, this advice was the most
hateful that could be imagined. The people thought themselves inevitably lost
if they should once abandon the temples of their gods, and the tombs of their
ancestors. But Themistocles using all his eloquence and address to work upon
their passions, represented to them that Athens did not consist either of its
walls or its houses but of its citizens, and that the saving of these was the
true preservation of the state. A decree therefore was passed, by which it was
ordained, that Athens for a while should be given up in trust to the gods, and
that all the inhabitants, whether in freedom or slavery, should embark on board
the fleet. In this calamitous desertion Cimon, though very young, was seen
encouraging the citizens by his words and example. Bearing in his hands a part
of his horse's furniture, he went to offer it as now useless in the temple of
Minerva, and then going down to the waterside was the first that cheerfully
went on board. When he was followed by the rest of the city, so moving and
melancholy a sight drew tears even from the most obdurate. A brave, generous,
polite, and ancient people, now forced from their native seats to undergo all
the vicissitudes and dangers of the sea, to implore a retreat from foreign
states, and give up their native lands to the spoiler was a most moving
spectacle. Yet the steadiness and courage of some, and the pious resignation of
all, demanded the utmost admiration. The young and adventurous embarked for
Salamis, the old, the women, and children, took shelter at the city of Trezene,
the inhabitants of which generously offered them an asylum. They even allowed
them a maintenance at the expense of the public, permitted their children to
gather fruit wherever they pleased, and appointed masters for their
instruction. But in this general desertion, that which extremely raised the
compassion of all, was the great number of old men they were obliged to leave
in the city on account of their age and infirmities. Many also voluntarily
remained behind, believing that the citadel which they had fortisied with
wooden ramparts, was what the oracle pointed out for general security. To
heighten this scene of general distress, the matrons were seen clinging with
fond affection to the places in which they had so long resided, the wives
filled the streets with loud lamentations, and even the poor domestic animals
seemed to take a part in the general concern. It was impossible to see these
poor creatures run howling and crying after their masters, who were going on
shipboard, without being strongly asfected. Among these, the faithfulness of a
particular dog is recorded, who jumped into the sea after his master, and
continued swimming as near as he could to the vessel till he landed at Salamis,
and died the moment after upon the shore. Those few inhabitants that remained
behind retired into the citadel, where, literally interpreting the oracle, they
fortified it as well as they could, and patiently awaited the invader's
approach.

Whilst Xerxes was continuing his march, he was told that the Grecians were
employed in seeing the games and combats then celebrating at Olympia. It was
not without indignation that he found his power so little able to terrify his
enemies, or interrupt their amusements. Having sent off a considerable
detachment of his army to plunder the temple at Delphos, with the rest he
marched down into Attica, where he found Athens deserted of all but a few in
the citadel. These men despairing of succor, and unwilling to survive the loss
of their country, would listen to no terms of accommodation; they boldly
withstood the first assault, and, warmed by the enthusiasm of religion, began
to hope for success. But a second assault carried their feeble outworks, they
were all put to the sword, and the citadel reduced to ashes. Flushed with this
success, Xerxes immediately dispatched a messenger to Susa with the news of his
victories, and, at the same time, sent him a great number of pictures and
statues, among which were those of Harmodius and Aristogiton.

In the mean time, the confederate Greeks summoned a council of war to consult
upon the proper manner and place of opposing this barbarous inundation. With
respect to the operations by land, it was universally determined to defend the
isthmus by a wall, and Cleombrotus, the brother of Leonidas, was appointed to
command that station; but as to the operations at sea, these were not so
generally agreed on. Eurybiades the Spartan, who was appointed to the command
of the fleet, was for having it advance near the isthmus, that it might
cooperate with the army at land, but Themistocles was entirely of another
opinion, and asserted, that it would be the most manifest error to abandon so
advantageous a post as that of Salamis, where they were then stationed. They
were now, he said, in possession of the narrow seas, where the number of the
enemy could never avail them; that the only hope now left the Athenians was
their fleet, and that this must not be capriciously given up by ignorance to
the enemy. Eurybiades, who considered himself as glanced at, could not contain
his resentment, but offered to strike Themistocles for his insolence. Strike
me, cried the Athenian, strike me, but hear me. His moderation and his
reasoning prevailed, the generals were reconciled to each other, and the result
of the council was, that they should prepare to receive the Persians on the
Isthmus by land, and in the streights of Salamis by sea.

Mean while Xerxes, after having demolished and burnt Athens, marched down
toward the sea to act in conjunction with his fleet, which he had determined
should once more come to an engagement with that of the enemy. This was what
Themistocles most ardently desired in his present situation, but he was fearful
his confederates would not have courage to abide the encounter. Their thoughts
were still bent upon sailing toward the isthmus, and assisting their army in
case of distress. Themistocles, therefore, in this exigence, was obliged to
have recourse to one of those stratagems which mark superiority of genius; he
contrived to let Xerxes privately understand, that the confederates were now
assembled at Salamis preparing for flight, and that it would be an easy task to
attack and destroy them. This information was attended with the desired
success. Xerxes gave orders to his fleet to surround Salamis by night, in order
to prevent an escape which he so much dreaded.

In this manner the Grecian fleet was blocked up, and no safety remained but in
intrepidity and conquest. Even Themistocles himself was not apprized of the
situation of his own forces and that of the enemy, all the narrow streights
were blocked up, and the rest of the Persian fleet was sent for, to make every
passage impracticable. In this exigence Aristides, in whose bosom the love of
his country always prevailed over every private revenge, was resolved to
venture all, in order to apprize Themistocles of his situation and danger. He
was then at Egina, where he had some forces under his command, and with very
great danger ventured in a small boat through all the fleet of the enemies by
night. Upon landing he made up to the tent of Themistocles, and addressed him
in the following manner: "If we are wise, Themistocles, we shall hencesorth lay
aside those vain and puerile dissensions which have thitherto separated us. One
strife, and a noble emulation it is, now remains for us, which of us shall be
most serviceable to our country. It is yours to command as a general, it is
mine to obey as a subject, and happy shall I be, if my advice can any way
contribute to your and my country's glory." He then informed him of the fleet's
real situation, and warmly exhorted him to give battle without delay.
Themistocles felt all that generous gratitude which so disinterested a conduct
demanded, and eager to show a return of noble friendship, let him into all his
projects and aims, particularly this last, of suffering himself to be
surrounded. After this they used their joint authority with the other
commanders to persuade them to engage, and accordingly both fleets prepared
themselves for battle.

The Grecian fleet consisted of three hundred and eighty ships, the Persian
fleet was much more numerous. But whatever advantage they had in numbers, and
the size of their shipping, they fell infinitely short of the Greeks in their
naval skill, and their acquainance with the seas where they fought; but it was
particularly in their commander that the Greeks had the advantage. Eurybiades
had nominally the conduct of the fleet, but Themistocles in reality conducted
all their operations. Nothing escaped his vigilance, and he knew how to improve
every incident to the greatest advantage. He, therefore, deferred the onset
until a wind, which at that time of the year was periodical, and which he knew
would be favorable, set in. As soon as this arose, the signal was given for
battle, and the Grecian fleet sailed forward in exact order.

Xerxes imputing his former ill success at sea to his own absence, was resolved
to be a witness of the present engagement from the top of a promontory, where
he caused a throne to be erected for that purpose. This served in some measure
to animate his forces, who, conscious of their king's observance, resolved to
merit his applause. The Persians, therefore, advanced with such courage and
impetuosity, as struck the enemy with terror, but their ardour abated when the
engagement became closer. The numerous disadvantages of their circumstances and
situation then began to appear. The wind blew directly in their faces; the
height and heaviness of their vessels rendered them unwieldy and useless, even
the number of their ships in the narrow sea where they fought, only served to
embarrass and increase their confusion. The Ionians, whom Themistocles had
implored by characters engraven along the rocks of their coast, to remember
from whence they derived their original, were the first who betook themselves
to flight. In the other wing the contest was for some time doubtful, until the
Phoenicians and Cyprians being driven on shore, the rest retired in great
disorder, and fell foul of each other in their retreat. In this total
defection, Artemisa alone seemed to stop the progress of victory; and, at the
head of her five ships, performed incredible acts of valor. Xerxes, who was a
spectator of her conduct, could not help crying out, that his soldiers behaved
like women in the conslict, and the women like soldiers. As this queen, from
her signal intrepidity, was become very obnoxious to the Athenians, a price had
been set upon her head; sensible of which, as she was upon the point of falling
into their hands, by a lucky turn of thought, she pretended to desert from her
own party, and to fall foul of one of their ships; the Grecks thus concluding,
that she either belonged to them, or was a deserter, permitted her to escape.
In the mean time, the confederates pursued the Persian fleet on every side;
some were intercepted at the streights of Attica, many were sunk, and more
taken. Above two hundred were burnt, all the rest were dispersed; and the
allies dreading the resentment of the Greeks, as well as of the Persian king,
made the best of their way to their own country.

Such was the success of the battle of Salamis, in which the Persians had
received a severer blow than they had ever hitherto experienced from Greece.
Themistocles, in a secret conversation with Aristides, was, or pretended to be
so elated, as to propose breaking down the bridge by which Xerxes had made his
way into Europe. Whether Themistocles was really sincere in the proposal,
remains a doubt, but Aristides used all his powers to persuade his coadjutor
from such an undertaking. He represented to him the danger of reducing so
powerful an enemy to desperation, and asserted, that it was his wish to be
relieved from such an intruder with all possible dispatch. Themistocles at once
acquiesced in his reasons; and, in order to hasten the king's departure,
contrived to have him secretly informed that the Grecians designed to break
down the bridge.

The situation of Xerxes was such, that the smallest repulse was now sufficient
to wean him from his darling expedition. Astonished at the late overthrow, and
alarmed at this new information, he only wanted a decent opportunity to
retreat, when Mardonius came conveniently to extricate him from his
embarrassments. He began by extenuating the late loss, and the many expedients
that remained to relieve their situation, he laid all the blame of their defeat
upon the cowardice of the auxiliaries, and their insincere attachment to his
cause. He advised him to return speedily to his kingdom, lest the fame of his
ill-success, which always represents things worse than they are, should
occasion any commotions in his absence. He engaged, if he would leave him three
hundred thousand of his choice troops, to subdue all Greece with glory. On the
other hand, if the event proved otherwise, he would take all the blame of
miscarriage, and suffer in person if it were to retrieve the honor of his
master. This advice was very well received by Xerxes, who, thinking enough had
been given to glory, when he had made himself master of Athens, prepared to
return to Persia at the head of a part of his army, leaving the other part of
it with Mardonius, not so much with the hope of reducing Greece, as through the
fear of being pursued.

These resolutions were communicated in a council held soon after the fight,
and the night following the fleet set sail in great confusion toward the
Hellespont, and took up their winter quarters at Cuma. The king himself,
leaving his generals to take care of the army, hastened with a small retinue to
the seaside, which he reached forty-five days after the battle of Salamis.
When he arrived at the place, he found the bridge broken down by the violence
of the waves in a tempest that had lately happened there. He was, therefore,
obliged to pass the straight in a small boat, which manner of returning, being
compared to the ostentatious method in which he had set out, rendered his
disgrace still more poignant and afflicting. The army which he had ordered to
follow him, having been unprovided with provisions, suffered great hardships by
the way. After having consumed all the corn they could find, they were obliged
to live upon herbs, and even upon the bark and leaves of trees. Thus harrassed
and fatigued, a pestilence begun to complete their misery; and, after a
fatiguing journey of forty-five days, in which they were pursued rather by
vultures and beasts of prey, than by men, they came to the Hellespont, where
they crossed over, and marched from thence to Sardis. Such was the end of
Xerxes' expedition into Greece. A measure begun in pride, and terminating in
infamy. It is to be observed, however, that we have all this account from the
Greek writers only, who no doubt have been partial to their countrymen. I am
told, that the Persian historians represent this expedition in a very different
light, and say that the king was recalled in the midst of his successes to
quell an insurrection at home. Be this as it will, the affairs of Persia seemed
after that to go backward, until the time when Alexander led a conquering army
of Greeks to invade them in turn.

CHAP. V. From the Retreat of XERXES to the Peace concluded between the GREEKS
and PERSIANS.
A. M. 3524.
THE earliest object the Greeks took care of after the battle of Salamis, was
to send the first fruits of the rich spoil they had taken from the Persians to
Delphos. Considered in a confederated light, they were ever attentive to the
duties of religion; and though their sects and opinions in philosophy, taught
mankind to entertain but very mean ideas of the objects of public worship, yet
it was religion that formed their bond of union, and for a while held them
feebly together. When that bond came to be broken, and the council of the
Amphyctions became rather a political than a religious assembly, the general
union no longer prevailed, and the different states fell a sacrifice to their
own contentions.

The joy of the Greeks upon this victory was general and loud; every commander
had his share of honor, but the glory of Themistocles eclipsed that of all the
rest. It was a custom in Greece, that after a battle the commanding officers
should declare who had distinguished themselves most, by writing the names of
such as merited the first and second rewards. On this occasion each officer
concerned adjudged the first rank to himself, but all allowed the second to
Themistocles, which was, in fact, a tacit superiority. This was farther
confirmed by the Lacedaemonians, who carried him in triumph to Sparta; and
having adjudged the rewards of valor to their own countryman, Eurybiades,
adjudged that of wisdom to Themistocles. They crowned him with olive, presented
him with a rich chariot, and conducted him with three hundred horse to the
confines of their state. But still there was an homage paid him that flattered
his pride yet more: when he appeared at the Olympic games, the spectators
received him with uncommon acclamations. As soon as he appear- the whole
assembly rose up to do him honor: nobody regarded either the games or the
combatants, Themistocles was the only spectacle worth their attention. Struck
with such flattering honors, he could not help observing, that he that day
reaped the fruits of all his labors.

After the Grecians were returned from pursuing the Persian fleet, Themistocles
sailed to all the islands that had espoused their interests, in order to levy
contributions. The first he applied to was that of Andros, from whose
inhabitants he required a considerable sum. I come, said he, to you accompanied
by two very powerful divinities, Persuasion and Necessity. Alas! replied they,
we also have divinities on our side, Poverty and Impossibility. In consequence
of this reply, he blocked them up for some time, but finding them too well
fortified, he was obliged to retire. Some other islands, however, were neither
furnished with so much reason or so much power. He exacted large sums from all
such as were incapable of opposition; and these contributions he chiefly
converted to his own private advantage, thus showing in his own character two
very oddly assorted qualities, avarice and ambition.

In the mean time, Mardonius, who remained in Greece with a body of three
hundred thousand men, passed the winter in Thessaly; and, in the beginning of
spring, led them down into the province of Boeotia. From thence he sent
Alexander, king of Macedonia, with a splendid retinue to Athens, to make
proposals for an accommodation, and to endeavor to make them separate their
interests from the general cause of Greece. He offered to rebuild their city,
to give them a considerable sum of money, to suffer them to enjoy their laws
and constitution, and to give them the government of all Greece. Aristides was
at that time in the highest office, being principal archon at Athens. It was in
his presence that the king of Macedon made his proposals, and that the deputies
from the other states of Greece endeavored to avert the force of them. But
Aristides wanted no prompter but the natural dictates of his own heart to give
them an answer. "To men, said he, bred up to pleasure and ignorance, it is
natural to prosser great rewards, and to hope by bribes to buy off virtue.
Barbarians who make silver and gold the chief objects of their esteem, may be
excused for thinking to corrupt the fidelity of every people, but that the
Lacedaemonians, who came to remonstrate against these offers, should suppose
they could prevail was indeed surprising. The Athenians have the common liberty
of Greece entrusted to their care, and mountains of gold are not able to shake
its fidelity. No, so long as that sun which the Persians adore continues to
shine with wonted splendour, so long shall the Athenians be mortal enemies to
the Persians, so long shall they continue to pursue them for ravaging their
lands, for burning their houses, and poluting their temples: such is the answer
we return to the Persian proposal; and you," continued he, addressing himself
to Alexander, "if you are truly their friend, refrain for the future from being
the bearer of such proposals, your honor, and perhaps even your safety demands
it."

All treaty being thus broke up, Mardonius prepared to act with vigor, and
invaded Attica, which the Athenians were once more obliged to desert and leave
to his fury. He entered Athens ten months after it had been taken by Xerxes,
the inhabitants having again conveyed themselves to Salamis, and other
neighboring places. In that state of exile and want, they continued contented
with all their sufferings, since repaid by freedom. Even Lycidas, a senator,
who attempted to propose a submission, was stoned to death, while his wife and
children met with the same fate from the women, so strong was the aversion
which the Athenians had conceived against all communications with Persia.

In the mean time, the Spartans, whose duty it was to cooperate with the
Athenians with equal ardour, unmindful of the general cause, only thought of
making preparations for their own security, and resolved to fortify the
isthmus, in order to hinder the enemy from entering into Peloponnesus. This the
Athenians considered as a base and ungrateful defection, and sent deputies to
remonstrate against the Spartan conduct. These had orders to say, that if
Sparta would persist in its partial method of seeking security, the Athenians
would follow their example; and, instead of suffering all for Greece, would
turn with their sleet to the Persians, who being thus masters of the sea, could
invade the territory of Sparta whenever they should think proper. These menaces
had so good an effect, that five thousand men were privately dispatched, each
attended with seven Helotes, and were actually upon their march before the
Spartans gave the Athenian deputies any answer.

Mardonius had left Attica at this time, and was on his return to the country
of Boeotia, where he resolved to await the approach of the enemy, as he could
there draw up his forces with greater ease than in the hilly parts of Attica,
where a few might be opposed to numbers with greater success. He encamped by
the river Asopus, along the banks of which his army extended, consisting of
three hundred thousand fighting men.

Great as this army was, the Greeks, with much inferior forces, resolved to
meet it in the field. Their forces were by this time assembled, and amounted to
seventy thousand men. Of these, five thousand were Spartans, attended by
thirty-five thousand Helotes. The Athenians amounted to eight thousand, and the
troops of the allies made up the remainder. In the right wing of this army the
Spartans were placed, commanded by Cleombrotus, in the left wing the Athenians,
with Aristides at their head. In this order they followed Mardonius into
Boeotia, determined on trying the fate of a battle, and encamped at no great
distance from them, at the foot of Mount Cythaeron. Here they continued for
some time, awaiting in dreadful suspense a battle that was to determine the
fate of Greece. Some skirmishing between the Persian cavalry and the wing of
the Grecian army, in which the latter were successful, seemed to give a presage
of future victory, which, however, for ten days neither side seemed willing to
strike for.

While the two armies were thus opposed, waiting the most favorable
opportunity of engaging, the Greeks, by their mutual dissensions, were upon the
point of losing their freedom in satisfying their mutual jealousy. The first
dispute that arose in the army, was begun by the Tegeans, who contended with
the Athenians upon the point of precedence. They willingly allowed the Spartans
the command of the right wing, as they constantly had it, but they insisted on
having the left, alleging, that they had earned it by former acts of valor
and well known success. The dispute ran high, a mutinous disposition began to
prevail in all parts of the army, and the enemy were likely to become
victorious without a blow. In this general spirit of dissension, Aristides
alone appeared unmoved. Long noted for his impartiality and justice, all
parties fixed their eyes upon him as the only moderator from whom they could
expect satisfaction. Wherefore, turning himself to the Spartans, and some of
the rest of the confederates, he addressed them in the following manner. "It is
not now a time, my friends, to dispute of the merit of past services, for all
boasting is vain in the day of danger. Let it be the brave man's pride to rest
assured, that it is not the post or station which gives courage, or which can
take it away. I head the Athenians, whatever post you shall assign us we will
maintain it, and make our station, wherever we are placed, the post of true
honor and military glory. We are come hither not to contend with our friends,
but to fight with our enemies; not to boast of our ancestors, but to imitate
them. This battle will distinguish the particular merit of each city, each
commander, and even the lowest sentinel will share the honor of the day." This
speech determined the council of war in favor of the Athenians, who,
thereupon, were allowed to maintain their former station.

A fatal conspiracy in the midst of the Athenians threatened consequences still
more dangerous, as they were unseen. Some of the best and richest families, who
had wasted their fortunes in the war, and lost their credit in the city,
entered into a confederacy to deliver up Greece into the hands of the Persians
Aristides, however, still watchful in the service of the state, was early
informed of their machinations, and instantly laid their schemes before the
general council. Notwithstanding he was contented with having eight of the
conspirators arrested; and, of these, two only were reserved for trial. Yet his
lenity, or, to call it by a truer name, his prudence, would not permit him to
act rigorously even against these; as he knew that severity in times of general
danger would but depress the ardour of the army, he permitted them to escape,
and thus sacrificed public justice to public security.

Both armies had now continued for ten days in sight of each other, in anxious
expectation of an engagement, both willing to begin, yet afraid to strike, as
the aggressor was to engage at a disadvantage. But Mardonius being naturally of
an impatient, fiery disposition, grew very uneasy at so long a delay. Besides,
he had only few provisions left for his army, and the Grecians grew every day
stronger by the addition of fresh supplies. He, therefore, called a council of
war to deliberate whether he should give battle. Artabazus, a person of
singular merit and great experience, was of opinion that they should not hazard
a battle, but that they should retire under the walls of Thebes, while the
enemy, formed of various troops, and subject to different leaders, would
destroy each other by their own dissensions, or might be partly corrupted to
give up the common cause. This opinion was the most reasonable, but Mardonius,
spurred on by his natural impetuosity, and wearied with a protracted war,
resolved to engage, nor had the rest courage to contradict his resolution. The
result, therefore, was that they should give battle the next day.

This being resolved on the side of Persia, the Greeks were not less prepared
for the engagement, for they had been secretly apprized the night before by
Alexander king of Macedon of the result of the Persian councils. Pausanias,
therefore, gave orders to his army to prepare themselves for battle, and
drawing up his forces, placed the Athenians on the right, as being better
acquainted with the Persian manner of fighting, and flushed with former
success. Whether it was fear or prudence that suggested this change to the
general, the Athenians took the post of honor with exultation; nothing was
heard among them but mutual exhortations to bravery, and a steady resolution to
conquer or fall. But Mardonius hearing of this alteration in the disposition of
the Grecian army, made an alteration also in his own. This also once more
produced a change in the disposition of the Greeks; by this changing and
rechanging the order of battle, nothing farther was done for that day.

At night the Greeks held a council of war, in which it was resolved, that they
should decamp from their present situation, and march to another, more
conveniently situated for water. As their removal was performed in the night,
much disorder ensued; and in the morning, Mardonius perceiving them scattered
over the plain, he supposed that they were flying, rather than retreating; he,
therefore, resolved to pursue with his whole army. The Greeks perceiving his
design, soon collected their scattered forces, which the darkness had
dispersed, but not intimidated, and halting near the little city of Platea,
there determined to await the shock of their pursuers. The barbarian forces
soon came up to the engagement with their accustomed howling, expecting rather
to plunder than to fight. The Lacedaemonians, who closed up the rear of the
Grecian army, were the first who supported the shock of the assailants. They
were in some measure separated from the rest of the army by the obstinacy of
one of their own regiments, who considered their retreat as contrary to the
idea of Spartan discipline, but still consisting of a formidable body of men,
they were in a capacity of making head against the invaders. Collecting
themselves into a phalanx, they stood impenetrable and immovable to all the
assaults of the enemy.

In the mean time, the Athenian troops who were apprized of the attack, quickly
turned back, in order to assist their allies; but the Greeks, who were in
Persian pay, to the number of five thousand intercepted their return. Thus, the
battle was divided into two, and fought with great ardour in various parts of
the field. But nothing could resist the weight of the Spartan phalanx, who,
after some time, broke in upon the Persian forces, and put them into disorder.
In this tumult, Mardonius attempting to restore the order of battle, and
rushing into the midst of the carnage, was killed by Aimnestus, a Spartan; and
soon after all his army betook themselves to flight. The other Greek troops
soon followed the brave example set them by Sparta, and the rout became
general. Artabazus, who commanded a body of forty thousand Persians, fled with
them toward the Hellespont, while the rest fortified themselves in their camp
with wooden ramparts. There they were attacked by the Spartans, but being not
well-skilled in that part of war, the Athenians soon came up to their
assistance, and soon effected a breach in this hasty rampart. It was then that
the slaughter of the enemy was indiscriminate and terrible. Of all the Persian
army that had taken refuge there, not four thousand men escaped. Above an
hundred thousand men were put to the sword; and the conquerors, willing to rid
their country at once of their terrible invaders, refused to give quarter. Thus
ended the Persian invasions of Greece, nor ever after was the Persian army seen
to cross the Hellespont.

The carnage being at last over, the Greeks buried their dead, which at most
did not amount to ten thousand men; and soon after, as a testimony of their
gratitude to Heaven, they caused a statue of Jupiter to made at the general
expense, which they placed in his temple at Olympia. The names of the several
nations of Greece that were present in the engagement, were engraven on the
right side of the pedestal of the statue, the Spartans first, the Athenians
next, and all the rest in order.

In the mean time, while success attended the Grecian arms upon land, they were
not less fortunate at sea. The greatest part of the Persian fleet, after the
defeat at Salamis, wintered at Cumae, and in the spring moved to Samos, both to
guard and awe the coasts of Asia. The Grecians, in the mean while, were
refitting their ships at Aegina, and being importuned by the Samians, they put
to sea under the conduct of Leotichydes, the Spartan, and Xanthippus, the
Athenian. The Persians apprised of their approaching, and having long
experienced their own inferiority, would not venture to oppose them at sea, but
drew up their ships upon land at Mycale, a promontory of lonia, where they
fortified them with a wall and a deep trench, while they were also protected by
an army of sixty thousand foot, under the command of Tigranes. This, however,
did not deter the Greeks from venturing to attack them. Leotichydes having
endeavored to make the Ionians revolt, landed his forces, and the next day
prepared for the assault. He drew up his army in two bodies; the one consisting
chiefly of Athenians and Corinthians, kept the plain, whilst the other of
Lacedaemonians, marched over the hills and precipices, to gain the highest
ground. The battle being joined, great courage and resolution was shown on both
sides, and the fortune of the day continued for a long time in suspense. The
defection of the Greek auxiliaries in the Persian army, turned the fate of the
battle; the Persians were soon routed, and pursued with great slaughter to
their very tents. The Athenians had made themselves masters of the field before
the Lacedaemonians could come up to their assistance, so that all the share
these had in the action, was to disperse some Persian troops which were
attempting to make a regular retreat, soon after their ramparts were forced,
and all their vessels burnt, so that nothing could be more complete than the
victory at Mycale. Tigranes, the Persian general, and forty thousand men of his
army, lay dead on the field of battle; the fleet was destroyed, and of the
great army brought into Europe by Xerxes, scarce one remained to bring back the
tidings.

The battle of Platea was fought in the morning, and that of Mycale in the
evening of the same day. But what is very extraordinary, it is universally
assirmed, that the victory at Plataea was known at Mycale before the battle
begun, though it is a passage of several days from one place to the other. It
is most probable, that Leotychides made use of the report to encourage his
army, and incite them to emulate their associates in the cause of freedom.

During these misfortunes, Xerxes, who had been the cause of all, lay at Sardis
expecting the event of his expedition, but every hour coming loaded with the
news of some fatal disaster, finding himself unable to retrieve his affairs, he
retired farther into the country, and endeavored to drown in luxury and riot
the uneasy reflections of his successless ambition. To the want of success
abroad, was added the contempt of his subjects at home; and this brought on a
train of treasons, insurrections, sacrilege, murder, incest, and cruelty; so
that the latter part of his reign was as scandalous as the first part of it had
been unfortunate.

The Grecian fleet after the battle of Mycale set sail toward the Hellespont,
in order to possess themselves of the bridges which Xerxes had built over that
straight, but finding them already destroyed by the tempestuous weather, they
returned home. From this time, all the cities of Ionia revolted from the
Persians, and having entered into the general consederacy, most of them
preserved their liberty during the time that empire subsisted.

The treasures which the Persians had brought into Greece were very great, and
these of consequence, became a prey to the conquerors. From this period, the
Greeks began to lose their spirit of hardy and laborious virtue, and to adopt
the refined indolence, the captious petulance, and the boundless love of
pleasure, which extreme wealth is ever known to produce. The former equality of
the people now began to be broken, and while one part of the inhabitants rioted
in opulence and luxury, another was seen pining in want and despair. It was in
vain that philosophy reared its head to stop these calamities; its voice
reaches to but a few; the great and the little vulgar are equally deaf to its
dictates. From this time we are to view a different picture; and, instead of a
brave and refined people confederating against tyranny, we are to behold an
ennervate and factious populace, a corrupt administration among those in power,
and wealth alone making distinction.

CHAP. VI. From the Victory at MYCALE to the Beginning of the PELOPONNESSIAN
War.
A. M. 3526.
NO sooner were the Greeks freed from the apprehensions of a foreign invasion,
than they began to entertain jealousies of each other. Indeed these petty
animosities had all along subsisted among them, but they were kept under by the
sense of general danger. As this collection of republics was composed of states
entirely dissimilar in manners, interests and inclinations, it was no way
surprising to find its parts ever at variance with each other. The first marks
of jealousy upon the destruction of the Persian army, exhibited themselves
between the Athenians and Spartans. The one a refined ambitious state,
unwilling to admit a superior in the general confederacy, the other an hardy
unpolished race, which could never think of admitting a feebler state as an
equal. The Athenians, with their families, being returned to their own country,
began to think of rebuilding their city, which had been almost destroyed during
the Persian war. As every new foundation aims at improving the old, they laid a
plan of strengthening and extending their walls, and giving their city at once
more magnificence and security. This was but natural, however the
Lacedaemonians conceived a jealousy at this undertaking, and began to think
that Athens, from being mistress of the seas, would soon attempt usurping all
authority upon land. They, therefore, sent an embassy to the Athenians to
dissuade them from this undertaking, giving as an ostensible reason, the danger
such fortifications would be of to the general confederacy if they should ever
fall into the hands of the Persians. This message at first appeared reasonable,
and the Athenians put an immediate stop to their undertaking; but Themistocles,
who since the battle of Salamis continued to guide in the assemblies of Athens,
easily saw through the pretext, and advised the council to meet their
dissimulation with similar address. He, therefore, answered the Spartan
ambassadors, that the Athenians would soon send an embassy to Lacedaemon, in
which they would fully satisfy all their scruples. Having thus gained time, he
procured himself to be elected for that important negotiation, and took care to
draw out the treaty by studied delays. He had previously desired that his
colleagues should follow one after another, and still he alleged at Lacedaemon
that he only waited for their arrival to determine the affair at a single
audience. During all this time the work was carried on at Athens with the
utmost vigor and industry, the women and children, strangers and slaves, were
all employed in it, nor was it interrupted for a single day. It was in vain
that the Spartans complained of this procedure; it was in vain that they urged
Themistocles to hasten his business, he steadfastly denied the fact, and
entreated them not to give any credit to loose and idle reports. He desired
they would send again and enquire into the truth of the matter; and, at the
same time, advised the Athenians to detain the Spartan envoys until he and his
colleagues should return. At last, finding all his pretenses for delay
exhausted, he boldly demanded an audience, and knowing that the work was
finished, he no longer kept on the mask. He then informed the Spartans in full
council, that Athens was now in a condition to keep out any enemy, whether
foreign or domestic: that what his countrymen had done was conformable both to
the law of nations, and the common interests of Greece. Every city had a right
to consult for its own safety, without submitting to the advice or control of
its neighbors; that what had been done was entirely in consequence of his
advice; and, in short, that whatever injury they offered him, they must expect
it would be returned upon their own ambassadors, who were still detained at
Athens. These declarations extremely displeased the Lacedaemonians, but, either
sensible of their truth, or unwilling to come to an open rupture, they
dissembled their resentment, and the ambassadors on both sides having all
suitable honors paid them, returned to their respective cities. Themistocles
was received with as much joy by his fellow citizens as if he had returned from
triumph, and he was of a disposition to feel those honors with the highest
delight.

Having thus taken proper precautions for securing the city, his next care was
to strengthen the port, and form an harbor at once spacious and secure. He
likewise obtained a decree, that every year they should build twenty vessels to
continue and augment their force by sea; and, in order to engage the greater
number of workmen and sailors to resort to Athens, he caused particular
privileges and immunities to be granted in their favor. His design was to
render Athens entirely a maritime city, in which he followed a very different
system of politics from their former governors, who bent all their efforts to
alienate the minds of the people from commerce and naval affairs.

But as success in one part is apt to lead on to designs still more extensive,
Themistocles was willing to outstep the bounds of justice in the prosecution of
his darling projects. He even formed a plan of supplanting Sparta, and making
Athens the unrivalled mistress of Greece. On a certain day, therefore, he
declared in a full assembly of the people, that he had a very important design
to propose, but which could not be communicated to the public, as the execution
required secrecy and dispatch. He, therefore, desired they would appoint a
person to whom he might explain himself, one whose judgment might direct, and
whose authority might confirm him in his design. To direct in a matter of this
importance, it was not easy to miss the wisest and the best man of the state,
and Aristides was unanimously chosen by the whole assembly, as the properest
person to weigh the justice as well as the utility of the proposal.
Themistocles, therefore, taking him aside, told him, that the design he had
conceived was to burn the fleet belonging to the rest of the Grecian states,
which then lay in a neighboring port, and thus procure Athens an undisputed
sovereignty of the sea. Aristides, inwardly displeased at the proposal, made no
answer, but returning to the assembly, informed them, that nothing could be
more advantageous to Athens than what Themistocles proposed, but that nothing
could be more unjust. The people, still possessed of a share of remaining
virtue, unanimously declined the proposal without knowing its contents, and
conferred the surname of Just upon Aristides, a title still the more
flattering, as he had so well deserved it.

Thus, Athens being restored to peace and security, once more began to apply to
those arts that adorn life and secure freedom. The people began to assume a
greater share in the government of the state than they had hitherto aspired at,
and steps were every day taken to render the constitution entirely popular.
Aristides perceived this, and justly dreaded the consequences of a democratic
government; he, therefore, procured a decree, that the archons who were the
chief magistrates of the state, should be chosen indiscriminately from all
ranks of Athenians without distinction. Thus, by indulging the citizens in a
part of their wishes, he secured a legal subordination among the whole.

In the mean time, the Grecians, encouraged by their former victories, resolved
to send a fleet to deliver their confederates, who still groaned beneath the
Persian yoke. Pausanias commanded the Spartan fleet, while Aristides, and
Cimon, the son of Miltiades, were appointed to conduct the fleets of Athens.
This was the first time the latter, who was yet very young, was placed in a
sphere for the exhibition of his virtues. He had formerly suffered himself to
be imprisoned toward the satisfying his father's fine, and his piety upon that
occasion gave the most favorable presage of his future greatness. When set at
liberty, his services in war soon became conspicuous, and it was seen that he
acted with the courage of his father, the judgment of Themistocles, and with
more sincerity than either. The ingenuous openness of his temper being easily
seen, he was opposed in the state as a counterpoise to the craft and subtlety
of Themistocles, and thus advanced to the highest employments both at home and
abroad. Under these commanders, the allied fleet first directed their course to
the isle of Cyprus, where they restored all the cities to their liberty; then
steering toward the Hellespont, attacked the city Byzantium, of which they
made themselves masters, and took a vast number of prisoners, many of whom were
the richest and most considerable families of Persia.

The success of this expedition was not more flattering to the Greeks than in
the end prejudicial to them. A deluge of wealth pouring in, corrupted the
simplicity, and tainted the manners of every rank of people. The Athenians
already skilled in the arts of politeness and effeminacy, concealed their
change for a time, but it soon broke out among the Spartans, and Pausanias
himself, their commander, was the first infected with the contagion. Being
naturally of an haughty and imperious temper, and still more impressed with the
gloomy austerity of Sparta, he set no bounds to his ambition; he treated his
officers, and even the confederate generals, with severity, arrogance, and
disdain, and so much alienated the minds of the soldiers, that he was forsaken
by all the confederates, who put themselves under the command and protection of
Aristides and Cimon. These generals had ever preserved a contrary conduct;
assable, courteous, and obliging, they tempered their authority with mildness,
and won by their manners such as they could not engage by their benefits. An
opposition so mortifying could not but be displeasing to Pausanias; it was in
vain that he attempted to keep up his authority by pride and ostentation, his
importance sunk with his unpopularity, and he became contemptible even to those
that still acknowledged his command.

Perhaps it was from these motives that he resolved to sacrifice his country to
his ambition, and give up to the Persians a state where he could no longer
expect to dictate. Be this as it will, he made overtures for gaining the favor
of Xerxes; and, in order to ingratiate himself at the court of that monarch, he
suffered some of his more exalted prisoners to make their escape by night,
commissioned with letters to Xerxes, wherein he offered to deliver up Sparta
and all Greece, on condition that he would give him his daughter in marriage.
Xerxes readily harkened to the proposal, and referred him to Artabazus, his
governor, to concert measures with him for putting it in execution. He also
furnished him with a large sum of money to be distributed among such of the
Grecian states as would join in the conspiracy.

How long this treaty continued secret we are not told, but it was discovered
at Sparta before it could be put into execution, and Pausanias was ordered home
to take his trial for the offense. The proofs, however, against him were not
sufficient for conviction, as the Ephori had made it a rule never to convict a
man but upon the plainest evidence. But his command was taken from him, and he
retired, still meditating revenge and the destruction of his country. It was
not long, however, before he received a second summons to appear before the
Ephori for fresh crimes, and a number of his own slaves were found to depose
against him. Still, however, he had the fortune to come off, the mildness of
the Spartan laws, and the authority of his regal office, which he still
possessed, conspiring to protect him.

Pausanias having in this manner twice escaped the justice of his country,
would not, however, abandon his base projects, or sacrifice his resentment to
his safety. Immediately upon his being acquitted, he returned to the seacoasts,
without any authority from the state, and still continued to carry on his
correspondence with Artabazus. He now acted with such little reserve, that his
conduct was known to the Ephori, and they only wanted information to convict
him. While they were thus perplexed for want of evidence, a certain slave, who
was called the Argilian, cleared their doubts, and came with proofs which could
not be resisted. This man had been employed by Pausanias to carry a letter to
Artabazus, and he accordingly prepared himself for the expedition, but
reflecting, that many of his fellow-slaves had been sent on similar messages,
and seeing none of them return, he was induced to open the packet of which he
was the bearer, and there he discovered the mystery and his own danger. It
seems, that Pausanias and the Persian governor had agreed to put to death all
the messengers they mutually sent to each other as soon as their letters were
delivered, that there might be no possibility left of tracing out, or
discovering the correspondence. This letter he delivered to the Ephori, who
were now convinced that Pausanias was guilty, but for a more thorough
confirmation, they were willing to have it from himself. For this purpose, they
contrived that the slave should take sanctuary in the temple of Neptune as for
safety and protection, and under a pretense of supplicating the deity for the
infidelity he had committed. The instant Pausanias was informed of his slave's
behavior, he hastened to the temple to enquire the reason, where the slave
informed him, that having opened his letter, he found the contents fatal to
himself, and therefore took this method of averting the danger. Pausanias
instead of denying the fact, endeavored rather to pacify the slave, and
promised him a large reward to bribe his future secrecy. But during this
interview, the Ephori had privately posted persons to overhear the
conversation, and they soon divulged his guilt. The moment, therefore, he was
returned to the city, the Ephori resolved to seize him, and from the aspect of
one of these magistrates he plainly perceived his danger: he, therefore, flew
to take sanctuary in the temple of Minerva, and got thither before his pursuers
could overtake him. As the religion of the state would not permit his being
taken forcibly from thence, the people stopped up the entrance with great
stones, and tearing off the roof, left him exposed to the inclemency of the
weather. After a short stay he was starved to death; and in this miserable
manner died the general who had led on the victorious troops to the field of
Plataea.

The fate of Pausanias soon after involved that of Themistocles, who had some
time before been banished, and lived in great esteem at Argos. A passionate
thirst of glory, and a strong desire to command arbitrarily over the citizens,
had made him very odious at Athens. He had built near his house a temple in
honor of Diana, under this title, To Diana, the Goddess of Good Counsel, as
hinting his own counsels upon several important occasions, and thus tacitly
reproaching his fellow-citizens of having forgot them. This, though a small
offense, was sufficient to expel him from so sluctuating and jealous a state as
that of Athens; but he was now accused of having participated in, and having
been privy to the designs of Pausanias. In fact, Pausanias had communicated to
him all his designs, but Themistocles had rejected his proposals with the
utmost indignation. But then he concealed his enterprises, either thinking it
base to betray the secrets trusted to his confidence, or imagining it
impossible for such dangerous and ill-concerted schemes to take effect. Be this
as it will, upon the downfall of Pausanias, it appeared that a correspondence
had been carried on between them, and the Lacedaemonians declared themselves
his accusers before the assembly of the people of Athens. Such of the citizens
as had long either envied, or feared Themistocles, now joined in the general
accusation, and urged his death with great acrimony. Aristides alone, who had
long been his open opposer, refused to join in this base confederacy against
him, and rejected so mean an opportunity of revenge, being as little inclined
to delight in the misfortunes of his adversary, as he had before been to envy
his successes. It was in vain that Themistocles answered by letters to the
calumnies laid against him; it was in vain that he alleged, that a mind like
his disdaining slavery at home, could think of wishing for it in exile; the
people too strongly wrought upon by his accusers, sent persons to seize and
bring him before the council of Greece. Fortunately, however, he had timely
notice of their design, and went to take refuge in the island of Corcyra, to
the inhabitants of which he had formerly done signal services. From thence he
fled to Epirus, and finding himself still pursued by the Athenians, grown at
length desperate, he fled to Admetus king of the Molossians for refuge. There
he first practiced all the abject arts of a man obliged to sue to a tyrant for
succor. He had upon a former occasion been instrumental in preventing the
Athenians from granting aid to this monarch, and this was now severely
remembered against him. Admetus was from home at the time Themistocles came to
implore protection; and, upon his return, he was surprised to find his old
adversary who had come to put himself under his protection. As soon as the king
appeared, Themistocles took that monarch's young son in his arms, and seating
himself amidst the household gods, informed him of the cause of his arrival, and
implored his clemency and protection. Admetus surprised, and moved with
compassion at seeing the greatest man of Greece an humble suppliant at his
feet, raised him immediately from the ground, and promised him protection.
Accordingly, when the Athenians and Lacedaemonians came to demand him, he
refused absolutely to deliver up a person who had made his palace an asylum, in
the firm persuasion that it would afford him safety and protection. Thus,
continuing to spend the close of life in indolence and retirement, having
learned to pardon and despise the ingratitude his country, he expected at least
their forgiveness. But the Athenians and Lacedaemonians would not suffer him to
live in peace, and still insisted on having him delivered up. In this exigence,
as the king found himself unable to protect his illustrious guest, he resolved
to promote his escape. He was, therefore, put on board a merchant ship, which
was sailing to Ionia, and his quality concealed with the utmost precaution. A
storm having carried the ship near the island of Naxos, then besieged by the
Athenians, the imminent danger he was in of falling into their hands, compelled
him to discover himself to the pilot, and prevailed upon him to steer for Asia;
where, arriving at Cumae, a city of Aeolia, in Asia Minor, he was from thence
sent under a strong guard, and in one of those covered chariots in which the
Persians were accustomed to convey their wives to the court at Sardis.

When the unfortunate exile was arrived at the palace of the voluptuous monarch
of the country, he waited on the captain of the guard, requesting, as a Grecian
stranger to have permission to speak with the king. The officer informed him of
a ceremony, which he knew was insupportable to some Greeks, but without which
none were allowed that honor. This was to fall prostrate before the Persian
monarch, and to worship him as the living image of the gods on earth.
Themistocles, who was never scrupulous of the means of obtaining what he
sought, promised to comply, and falling on his face before the king in the
Persian manner, declared his name, his country, and misfortunes. "I have done,
cried he, my ungrateful country services more than once, and I am now come to
offer these services to you. My life is in your hands: you may now exert your
clemency, or display your vengeance. By the former you will preserve a faithful
suppliant, by the latter you will destroy the greatest enemy to Greece." The
king made him no answer at this audience, though he was struck with admiration
at his eloquence and intrepidity, but he soon gave a loose to his joy for the
event. He told his courtiers, that he considered the arrival of Themistocles as
a very happy accident, and wished that his enemies would for ever pursue the
same destructive methods of banishing from among them all the good and wise.
Even his satisfactions were continued in a dream. At night he was seen to start
from his sleep, and three times to cry out, "I have got Themistocles the
Athenian." He even gave him three cities for his support, and had him
maintained in the utmost affluence and splendour. It is said that such was his
favor at the Persian court, and so great was the consideration in which he was
held by all ranks of mankind, that one day at table he was heard to cry out to
his w^fe and children that were placed there, "Children, we should have been
certainly ruined, if we had not been formerly undone."

In this manner he lived in affluence and contented slavery, until the king
began to think of employing his talents in sending him at the head of an army
against Athens. Athough Themistocles professed himself an open enemy to that
state, yet he still harbored a latent affection for it, which no resentment
could remove. The consciousness that he should be instrumental in overturning a
city which had been made to flourish by his counsels, gave him inexpressible
pain. He found himself at last unable to sustain the conflict between his
gratitude to the king and his love to his country; and, therefore, resolved
upon dying as the only means of escaping from his perplexity. He, therefore,
prepared a solemn sacrifice, to which he invited all his friends, when, after
embracing them all, and taking a last farewell, he swallowed poison, which soon
put an end to his life. He died at Magnesia, aged threescore and five years,
the greatest part of which he had spent in the intrigues and bustles of active
employment. Themistocles seemed to unite in himself all the prominent features
of the Greek character; sagacious, eloquent, and brave, yet unprincipled,
artful, and mercenary, with too many virtues ever to be mentioned as a
despicable character, and too many defects ever to be considered as a great one.

In the mean time, while Themistocles was thus become the sport of fortune, the
just Aristides attempted a nobler path to glory. It has already been observed,
that the command of Greece had passed from Sparta to the Athenians; and it was
agreed among the body of the states, that their common treasure for carrying on
the expenses of the war, should be lodged in the island of Delos, under the
custody of a man of a clear head and an incorrupt heart. The great question,
therefore, was where to find a man to be trusted with so important a charge,
and steadfastly known to prefer the public interest to his own. In this general
disquisition all parties at last cast their eyes on Aristides, of whom
Themistocles used jestingly to say, that he had no other merit than that of a
strong box, in keeping safely what was committed to his charge.

The conduct of Aristides in his discharge of this duty, only served to confirm
the great opinion mankind had formed of his integrity. He presided over the
treasury with the care of a father over his family, and the caution of a miser
over what he holds dearer than himself. No man complained of his
administration, and no part of the public money was exhausted in vain. He who
thus contributed to make government rich, was himself very poor; and so far was
he from being ashamed of poverty, that he considered it as glorious to him as
all the trophies and victories he had won. It happened upon a certain occasion,
that Callias, an intimate friend and relation of Aristides, was summoned before
the judges for some offense, and one of the chief objections alleged against
him, was that while he rolled in affluence and luxury, he suffered his friend
and relation Aristides to remain in poverty and want. Upon this occasion,
Aristides was called upon, when it appeared that Callias had often offered to
share his fortune with him, but that he declined the benefit; asserting, that
he only might be said to want who permitted his appetites to transgress the
bounds of his income, and that he who could dispense with a few things, thus
rendered himself more like the gods, that want for nothing.

In this manner he lived, just in his public, and independent in his private
capacity. His house was a public school for virtue, and was open to all young
Athenians who sought wisdom, or were ambitious of power. He gave them the
kindest reception, heard them with patience, instructed them with familiarity,
and endeavored above all things to give them a just value for themselves.
Among the rest of his disciples Cimon, who afterward made such a distinguished
figure in the state, was one of the foremost.

History does not mention the exact time or place of his death, but it pays the
most glorious testimony to his disinterested character, in telling us, that he
who had the absolute disposal of all the public treasures died poor. It is even
asserted, that he did not leave money enough behind him to pay the expenses of
his funeral, but that the government was obliged to bear the charge of it, and
to maintain his family. His daughters were married, and his son subsisted at
the expense of the public, and some of his grandchildren were subsisted by a
pension equal to that which such received as had been victorious at the Olympic
games. But the greatest honor which his countrymen paid to his memory, was in
giving him the title of Just, a character far superior to all the empty titles
of wisdom or conquest, since fortune or accident may confer wisdom or valor,
but all the virtues of morality are solely of our own making.

Athens being in this manner deprived of the counsels and integrity of her two
greatest magistrates, room was now made for younger ambition to step forward,
and Cimon, the son of Miltiades, promised to fill the scene with dignity and
honor Cimon had spent his youth in excesses, from whence it was thought no
effort could extricate him. When he first offered to gain public favor, he was
so ill received by the people, prejudiced against him by his former follies,
that he suffered the most cruel neglect. But, though he was possessed of
courage and abilities, he began to lay aside all thoughts of the public,
contented with only humbler satisfactions. But Aristides perceiving that his
dissolute turn of mind was united with many great qualifications, he inspired
him with fresh hopes, and persuaded him once more to renew the onset He now,
therefore, entirely changed his conduct, and laying aside his juvenile follies,
aimed at nothing but what was great and noble. Thus, he became not inferior to
Miltiades in courage, to Themistocles in prudence, and was not far surpassed by
Aristides in integrity.

The first expedition of any note to the command of which Cimon was appointed,
was of the fleet destined to scour the Asiatic seas. When he was arrived at
Caria, all the Grecian cities upon the seacoast immediately came in, and the
rest, which were garrisoned by the Persians, were taken by storm. Thus, by his
conduct as well as by his intelligence, the whole country from Ionia to
Pamphylia declared against the power of Persia, and joined in the association
with Greece.

The capture of the city Eion is too remarkable to be past over in silence.
Boges was governor, who held it for his master, the king of Persia, with a firm
resolution to save it, or perish in its fall. It was in his power to have
capitulated with the besiegers, and Cimon had often offered him very
advantageous terms, but preferring his honor to his safety, he declined all
treaty, and defended his station with incredible fury, till he found it no
longer possible to continue his defense. Being at last in the utmost want of
provisions, he threw all his treasures from the walls into the river Strymon,
after which, killing his wife and children, he laid them upon a pile which he
had erected for that purpose, and then setting fire to the whole, rushed and
expired in the midst of the flames.

Cimon thus proceeding from one conquest to another, was at last informed that
the whole Persian fleet was anchored at the mouth of the river Eurymedon, where
they expected a reinforcement of ships from Phoenicia, and, therefore, deferred
an engagement till then. The Athenian general, however, resolved, if possible,
to prevent this junction, and ranged his galleys in such a posture as to
prevent, it and yet compel the enemy to an engagement. It was in vain that the
Persian fleet retired farther up the mouth of the river, the Athenians still
pursued them up the stream, until they were obliged to prepare for battle. The
Persians having the superiority of an hundred sail, maintained the conflict for
some time with great intrepidity, but being at last forced on shore, they who
came first threw themselves upon land, leaving their empty vessels to the
enemy. Thus, besides what were sunk, the Athenians took above two hundred
ships, and following their blow upon land, the Greek soldiers jumping from
their ships, and setting up a shout, ran furiously upon the enemy, who
sustained the first shock with great resolution. But, at length, the Grecian
valor surmounted the enemy's desperation; a total rout of the Persians ensued,
numbers were made prisoners, and a great quantity of plunder seized, which was
found in their tents. Thus, the Greeks, obtained a double victory by sea and
land upon the same occasion.

Cimon having returned successful from this expedition, resolved to expend
those treasures which he had taken in war, in beautifying and adorning his
native city. A taste for architecture had for some time been entering into
Greece, and the Athenians gave the world examples in this art, that surpass all
others to this very day. Victories so very humiliating to the pride of Persia,
induced that empire at last to think of peace, and after some time a treaty was
concluded, in which the terms were very honorable on the side of Greece. It
was stipulated, that the Grecian cities in Asia should be left in quiet
enjoyment of their liberty, and that both the land and sea forces of the
Persians should be kept at such a distance from the Grecian seas, as not to
create the smallest suspicion. Thus entirely ended the Persian war, which had
kept the Grecian states united, and called all their abilities into exertion;
from that time forward those enmities which were dissipated upon the common
foe, began to be turned upon each other; they lost all warlike spirit in petty
jealousies, and entirely softening by the refinements and luxuries of peace,
prepared themselves for submission to the first invader of their freedom.

About this time the study of philosophy was carried from Ionia to Athens by
Athenagoras the Clazomenian. Poetry was, at the same time, cultivated by
Simonides of the island of Ceos, who sung the exploits of his country in a
style becoming their valor. His writings however have not had merit enough to
preserve them from oblivion; and, it may be asserted, that mankind never suffer
any work to be lost which tends to make them more wise or happy.

CHAP. VII. From the Peace with PERSIA to the Peace of NICIAS.
THE state of Athens being thus in a great measure freed from its fears of a
foreign enemy, began to cherish intestine animosities, and its citizens
labored with every art to supplant each other in aiming at places of trust and
authority. Besides Cimon, who, by general consent, had been appointed to
conduct the fleet and army, others endeavored to take the lead at home, and to
govern with less hazard the operations of the state. The foremost in this
attempt was Pericles, who was much younger than Cimon, and of a quite different
character. Pericles was descended from the greatest and most illustrious
families of Athens: his father, Xanthippus, defeated the Persians at Mycale,
and his mother Agarista, was niece to Calisthenes, who expelled the tyrants,
and established a popular government in Athens. He had early thoughts of rising
in the state, and took lessons from Anaxagoras, in the philosophy of nature. He
studied politics with great assiduity, but particularly devoted himself to
eloquence, which, in a popular slate, he considered as the fountain of all
promotion. His studies were crowned with success; the poets, his cotemporaries,
affirm, that his eloquence was so powerful, that, like thunder, he shook and
astonished all Greece. He had the art of uniting force and beauty; there was no
resisting the strength of his arguments, or the sweetness of his delivery.
Thucydides, his great opponent, was often heard to say, that though he had
often overthrown him, the power of his persuasion was such, that the audience
could never perceive him fallen.

To this eloquence he added also a thorough insight into human nature, as well
as a perfect acquaintance with the disposition of his auditors. It was a
constant saying with him to himself, Remember Pericles thou art going to speak
to men born in the arms of liberty, and still took care to flatter them in
their ruling passion. He resembled the tyrant Pisistratus, not only in the
sweetness of his voice, but the features of his face, and his whole air and
manner. To these natural and acquired graces, he added those of fortune; he was
very rich, and had an extensive alliance with all the most powerful families of
the state.

The death of Aristides, the banishment of Themistocles, and the absence of
Cimon, gave opportunities to his growing ambition. Yet he at first concealed
his designs with the most cautious reserve, till finding the people growing
more and more in his interest, he set himself at their head, and opposed the
principal men of the state with great appearance of disinterelled virtue. The
chief obstacle to his rise was Cimon, whose candor and liberality had gained
him a numerous party of all ranks and denominations. In opposition to him,
Pericles called in popular assistance, and by expencing the public money in
bribes, largesses, and other distributions, he easily gained the multitude to
espouse his interests.

Thus, having laid a secure foundation in popularity, he next struck at the
council of the Areopagus, composed of the most respectable persons of all
Athens; and, by the assistance of one Ephialtes, another popular champion, he
drew away most causes from the cognizance of that court, and brought the whole
order into contempt. In this manner, while Cimon was permitted to conduct the
war abroad, he managed all the supplies at home; and, as it was his interest to
keep Cimon at a distance, he took care to provide him with a sufficiency of
foreign employment.

In this state of parties at Athens, an infurrection of the Helotae, or
Lacedaemonian slaves, gave an opportunity of trying the strength of either.
These men, who had for several centuries groaned under the yoke of their
countrymen, and had been excluded from all hopes of rising, merely by the
influence of an unjust precedent to their prejudice, at last took up arms
against their masters, and threatened no less than the destruction of the
Spartan state. In this extremity the Lacedaemonians sent to Athens to implore
succors; but this was opposed by Fphialtes, who declared, that it would be no
way advisable to assist them, or to make a rival city powerful by their
assistance. On the other hand, Cimon espoused the cause of Sparta, declaring,
that it was weak and inconsistent to maim the Grecian confederacy, by suffering
one of its members to be tamely lopped away. His opinion for this time
prevailed; he was permitted to march forth at the head of a numerous body to
their relief, and the insurrection was quelled at their approach. But shortly
after the mischief broke out afresh. The Helots possessed themselves of the
strong fortress of Ithome, and the Spartans again petitioned for Athenian
assistance. It was now that the party of Pericles was found to prevail, and the
Lacedaemonians were refused a compliance with their demands. Thus left to
finish the war with their insurgent slaves in the best manner they could, after
besieging Ithome, which held out for ten years, they at last became masters of
it, sparing the lives of those who defended it, upon condition of leaving
Peloponnesus ever after.

In the mean time, the refusal on the side of Athens, and some indignities said
to be received on the side of Lacedaemon, revived a jealousy that had long
subsisted between these rival states, which continued thence forward to operate
with greater or diminished influence, until both were utterly unabled to
withstand the smallest efforts of foreign invasion.

The first instance the Athenians gave of their resentment, was to banish
Cimon, who had been a favourer of the Spartan cause, for ten years, from the
city. They next dissolved their alliance with Sparta, and entered into a treaty
with the Argives, the professed enemies of the former. The slaves of Ithome
were also taken under Athenian protection, and settled with their families at
Naupactus. But what contributed to widen the breach still more, the city of
Megara revolting from its alliance with Sparta, was protected and garrisoned by
the Athenians; thus was laid the foundation of an inveterate hatred, which
ended in mutual destruction.

As, in all beginning enmities, several treaties were entered into, and several
leagues concluded on both sides, till at last they came to a formal rupture.
Two pitched battles between the Athenians and Corinthians, in which either side
was alternatively victorious, sounded the alarm. Another followed between the
Athenians and Spartans at Tangara, in which, Cimon forgetting the injury he had
sustained from his country, came in to its assistance; but the Athenians
suffered a defeat. A month or two after repaired the disgrace, and the
Athenians were in their turn victorious. The conduct of Cimon again restored
him to public favor; he was recalled from banishment, in which he had spent
five years; and it was Pericles, his rival, who first proposed the decree.

The first use Cimon made of his return, was to reconcile the two rival states
to each other; and this was so far affected outwardly, that a truce for five
years was concluded between them. This led the way to exerting the power of the
state upon a more distant enemy. By his advice, a fleet of two hundred sail was
manned, and destined, under his command, to conquer the island of Cyprus. He
quickly sailed, overran the island, and laid siege to Citium. Here, being
either wounded by the defendants, or wasted by sickness, he began to perceive
the approaches of dissolution; but still mindful of his duty, he ordered his
attendants to conceal his death until their schemes were crowned with success.
They obeyed with secrecy and success. Thirty days after he was dead, the army,
which still supposed itself under his command, gained a signal victory; thus he
died not only in the arms of conquest, but gained battles merely by the
efficacy of his name. With Cimon, in a great measure, expired the spirit of
glory in Athens. As he was the last, so he was the most successful of the
Grecian heroes. Such was the terror of the Persians at his name, that they
universally deserted the seacoasts, and would not come within four hundred
furlongs of the place where he could be possibly expected.

Pericles being now, by the death of Cimon, freed from a potent rival, set
himself to complete the work of ambition which he had begun, and by dividing
the conquered lands, amusing the people with shows, and adorning the city with
public buildings, he gained such an ascendant over the minds of the people,
that he might be said to have attained a monarchical power in Athens. He found
means to maintain for eight months in the year a great number of poor citizens,
by putting them on board the fleet, consisting of threescore ships, which he
fitted out every year. He planted several colonies in the many places which had
lately submitted to Athens. By this he cleared the city of a great number of
idle persons, who were ever ready to disturb government; and were, at the same
time, unable to subsist. But the public buildings which he raised, the ruins of
some of which subsist to this day, are sufficient to endear his name to
posterity. It is surprising, that in a city not noted for the number of its
inhabitants, and in so short a space of time as that of his administration,
such laborious, expensive, and magnificent works could be performed. All the
arts of architecture, sculpture, and painting were exhausted in his designs;
and what still remain, continue to this hour as inimitable models of
perfection. To effect these great works, he, in some measure, had recourse to
injustice, and availed himself of those treasures which had been supplied by
Greece for carrying on the war with Persia, and which having been lodged at
Delos, he had address enough to get transported to Athens, where he expended
them in securing his own power by all the arts of popularity. By these means
Athens became so much admired, and envied by her neighbors, that it went by
the name of the Ornament; and when it was urged, that the common treasure was
squandred away in these works of show, Pericles answered, that the people of
Athens were not accountable to any for their conduct; for they had the best
right to the treasures of the confederated states who took the greatest care to
defend them. He added, that it was fit ingenious artizans should have their
share of the public money, since there was still enough left for carrying on
the war.

These were rather the arguments of power than persuasion, of a man already in
possession than willing upon just grounds to relinquish what he claimed. It was
seen not only by the wiser citizens, but by all the states of Greece, that he
was daily striding into power, and would, as Pisistratus had done before, make
the people the fabricators of their own chains. For remedying this growing
evil, the heads of the city opposed Thucydides to his growing power, and
attempted to restrain his career by opposing eloquence to popularity.

Thucydides was brother-in-law to Cimon, and had displayed his wisdom on
numberless occasions. He was not possessed of the military talents of his
rival; but his eloquence gave him a very powerful influence over the people. As
he never left the city, he still combated Pericles in all his measures, and for
a while brought down the ambition of his rival to the standard of reason.

But his efforts could not long avail against the persuasive power and corrupt
influence of his opponent. Pericles every day gained new ground, till he at
last found himself possessed of the whole authority of the state. It was then
that he began to change his behavior, and from acting the fawning and humble
suppliant, he assumed the haughty airs of royalty. He now no longer submitted
himself to the caprice of the people, but changed the democratic state of
Athens into a kind of monarchy, without departing however from the public good.
He would sometimes indeed win his fellow-citizens over to his will, but at
other times, when he found them obstinate, he would in a manner compel them to
consult their own interests. Thus, between power and persuasion, public
profusion, and private economy, political falsehood, and private integrity,
Pericles became the principal ruler at Athens, and all such as were his
enemies, became the enemies of the state.

It is not to be wondered, that this prosperous and magnificent state of Athens
was not a little displeasing to the rival states of Greece, especially as its
state of splendour was, in some measure, formed from their contributions. The
Spartans particularly still continued to regard this growing city with envy,
and soon showed their displeasure, by refusing to send deputies to Athens to
consult about repairing the temple that had been burnt down during the wars
with Persia. The successes of Pericles against the enemy in Thrace, still more
increased their uneasiness; and particularly when sailing round Peloponnesus
with an hundred ships, he protected the allies of Greece, and granted their
cities all they thought fit to ask him. These successes raised the indignation
of Sparta, while they intoxicated Athens with ideas of ambition, and opened new
inlets for meditating conquest. The citizens now began to talk of attempts upon
Egypt, of attacking the maritime provinces of Persia, of carrying their arms
into Sicily, and of extending their conquests from Italy to Carthage. These
were views beyond their power, and that rather marked their pride than their
ability.

An expedition against Samos, in favor of the Miletians, who had craved their
assistance, was the beginning of this rupture, which never after was closed up.
It is pretended, that Pericles fomented this war, to please a famous courtezan
named Aspasia, of whom he was particularly enamoured. After several events and
battles, not worth the regard of history, Pericles besieged the capital of
Samos with tortoises and battering rams, which was the first time these
military engines had been employed in sieges. The Samians, after sustaining a
nine months siege, surrendered. Pericles rased their walls, dispossessed them
of their ships, and demanded immense sums to defray the expenses of the war.
Flushed with this success, he returned to Athens, buried all those who had lost
their lives in the siege in the most splendid manner, and pronounced their
funeral oration.

A rupture now between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians seemed inevitable. A.
M. 3572.
Pericles, therefore, to anticipate the designs of his rival state, advised
that aid should be sent to the people of Corcyra, whom the Corinthians,
assisted by the Lacedaemonians, had invaded.

As the quarrel between the Corcyreans and Corinthians gave rise to the great
Peloponnesian war, which soon after involved all Greece, it will be necessary
to give a slight account of its original. Epidamnus was a colony of the
Corcyreans, which growing first rich, and soon after factious, banished the
chief of her citizens. The exiles joining with the Illyrians, brought the
Epidamnians so low, that they were obliged to send to Corcyra, their parent
city, for assistance. The Corcyreans rejecting their request, they had recourse
to Corinth; and giving themselves up to that state, were taken under its
protection. This, however, the Corcyreans began to resent, and having been
remiss in affording assistance themselves, resolved to punish such as should
offer any. A rupture ensued between the Corinthians and Corcyreans, some naval
engagements ensued, in which the Corcyreans being worsted, had recourse, as has
been already observed, to the Athenians for support, who sent some naval
succors, which, however, proved of no great efficacy in their desence.

From this war arose another; for Potidaea, a city belonging to Athens,
declaring for Corinth, these two states, from being accessaries, became
principals, and drew their forces into the field near Potidaea, where a battle
ensued, in which the Athenians had the victory. It was in this battle that
Socrates saved the life of Alcibiades, his pupil; and after the battle was
over, procured him the prize of valor which he himself had more justly earned.
The city of Potidaea was soon after besieged in consequence of this victory,
and the Corinthians complained to the states of Greece against the Athenians as
having infringed the articles of peace. The Lacedaemonians, in particular,
admitted them to an audience, where the deputies of Corinth endeavored to
rouse them into a sense of their danger from the ambitious designs of Athens;
and threatened, if left unprotected, to put themselves under the command of a
power strong enough to grant them protection and safety. After hearing what the
Athenians had to reply, the Spartans came to a close debate among themselves,
wherein it was universally agreed, that the Athenians were the aggressors, and
that they should be reduced to a just sense of their duty. But the dispute was,
whether war should be immediately declared against them, or remonstrances made
to bring them to reason. Archidamus, one of their kings, a man of prudence and
temper, was of opinion, that they were not at this time a match for Athens, and
endeavored to dissuade them from rushing into a thoughtless and improvident
war. But Sthenelaides, one of the Ephori, urged the contrary, alleging, that
when once they had received an injury, they ought not to deliberate, but that
revenge should follow insult. Accordingly a war was declared, and all the
confederates were made acquainted with the resolution.

War being thus resolved upon, in order to give a color of justice to their
designs, the Lacedaemonians began by sending ambassadors to Athens; and while
they made preparations for acting with vigor, still kept up a show of seeking
redress by treaty. They required of the Athenians the expulsion of some who had
profaned the temple of Minerva at Cylon from their city; they demanded that
the siege of Potidaea should be raised, and that the Athenians should cease to
infringe upon the liberties of Greece.

Pericles now saw that as he had led the Athenians into a war, it was incumbent
upon him to inspire them with courage to prosecute it with success. He showed
his countrymen that even trifles extorted from them with an air of command,
were in themselves a sufficient ground for war: that they might promise
themselves a considerable share of success from the division in the
confederated councils of their opponents: that they had shipping to invade
their enemies coasts, and their city being well fortified, could not easily be
taken by land. He concluded with telling them the absolute necessity there was
for war; and that the more cheerfully they undertook it, the easier it would
come to an happy conclusion. That the greatest honors had generally recurred
to their state from the greatest extremities; that this might serve to animate
them in its defense, so as to transmit it with undiminished honor to
posterity. The people, giddy, fond of change, and unterrified by distant
dangers, readily came into his opinion; and, to give some color to their
proceedings, sent evasive answers to the Spartan demand, and concluded with
asserting, that they desired to adjust all differences by treaty, as being
unwilling to begin a war; but, in case of danger, would defend themselves with
desperate resolution.

Thus the people, from their love of change, entered hastily into the war, but
Pericles was personally interested in its declaration. He was deeply indebted
to the state, and knew that a time of peace was the only opportunity in which
he could be called upon to settle his accounts. It is said that Alcibiades, his
nephew, seeing him one day very pensive, and demanding the reason, was
answered, that he was considering how to make up his accounts. "You had better,
said he, consider how to avoid being accountable." Besides this, Pericles
finding no happiness in domestic society, gave himself up to the allurements of
his mistress Aspasia, whose wit and vivacity had captivated all the poets and
philosophers of the age, even Socrates himself not excepted. She was inclined
to oppose the Spartan state; and he, in some measure, is thought to acquiesce
in her advice.

War being thus resolved on every side, the first dawn of success seemed to
offer in favor of Athens; the city of Platea, that had lately declared for
them, was surprised by three hundred Thebans, who were let in by a party of the
town that joined in the conspiracy. But a part of the citizens that had
espoused the opposite interests, falling upon them in the night, killed a part,
and took two hundred prisoners, who a little time after were put to death. The
Athenians, as soon as the news was brought of this action, sent succors and
provisions thither, and cleared the city of all persons who were incapable of
bearing arms. From this time all Greece appeared in motion, every part of it
took a side in the common quarrel, except a few states who continued neuter
till they should see the event of the war. The majority were for the
Lacedaemonians, as being the deliverers of Greece, and espoused their interests
with ardour. On their side were ranged the Achaians, the inhabitants of Pellene
excepted, the people Megara, Locris, Boeotia, Phocis, Ambracia, Leucadia, and
Anactorium. On the side of Athens, were the people of Chios, Lesbos, Platea,
many of the islands, and several tributary maritime states, including those of
Thrace, Potidaea excepted.

The Lacedaemonians immediately after their attempt upon Platea assembled a
body of men, making up with their confederates sixty thousand in number:
Archidamus, who commanded the army, harrangued them in an animated speech. He
told them, that the eyes of all Greece were upon them; that they were superior
in numbers, and were to oppose an enemy not only inferior in number, but
oppressed with the consciousness of their own violence and injustice. He
exhorted them to march boldly into the country they were about to enter, with
that courage for which they had been long famous, and that caution which was
requisite against so insidious an adversary. The whole army answered with an
acclamation of joy; and thus, that war which was to be the destruction of
Greece, was commenced in a phrensy of transport by its shortsighted
inhabitants, who hurried on to mutual ruin.

Pericles, on the other hand, prepared his scanty body of Athenians to meet the
threatened blow. He declared to the Athenians, that should Archidamus, when he
was laying waste the Athenian territories, spare any part of those lands that
belonged to Pericles himself, he would only consider it as a trick to impose
upon Athenian credulity; he, therefore, gave up all his property in those
lands, and resigned them back to the state, from which his ancestors had
originally received them. He remonstrated to the people, that it was their
interest to contract the war, and to let the enemy consume themselves by delay.
He advised them to remove all their effects from their country, and to shut
themselves up in Athens, without ever hazarding a battle. Their troops indeed
were but very scanty compared to those they were to oppose; they amounted but
to thirteen thousand heavy armed soldiers, sixteen thousand inhabitants, and
twelve hundred horse, with a body of archers about double that number. This was
the whole army of the Athenians, but their chief strength consisted in a fleet
of three hundred galleys, which, by continually infesting and plundering the
enemies coast, raised contributions sufficient to defray the expenses of the
war.

Impressed with the exhortation of Pericles, the Athenians, with a mixture of
grief and resolution, forsook the culture of their fields, and carried all
their possessions that could be conveyed away with them into Athens. They had
now enjoyed the sweets of peace for near fifty years, and their lands wore an
appearance of wealth and industry; but from the fate of war they were once more
obliged to forsake culture for encampment, the sweets of rural life for their
shocks of battle.

In the mean time, the Lacedaemonians entered the country at Oenoe, a frontier
fortress, and leaving it behind them, marched forward to Acharne, an unwalled
town, within seven miles of Athens. The Athenians, terrified at their approach,
now began to convert their fury against the enemy into reproaches against their
former leader. They abused him for bringing them into a war, in which he had
not strength to oppose, nor courage to protect; they loudly desired,
notwithstanding the inferiority of their number, to be led into the field of
battle. Pericles, however, chose the more moderate part. He shut up the city
gates, placed sufficient guards at all the posts around, sent out parties of
horse to keep the enemy employed; and, at the same time, ordered out one
hundred galleys to infest the coasts of Peloponnesus. These precautions at last
succeeded; after the Lacedaemonians had laid waste the whole country round
Athens, and insulted the defenders of the city by their numbers and their
reproaches, finding the place impregnable, they abandoned the siege, and the
inhabitants once more issued from their walls in joy and security.

The Athenians after this severe mortification, resolved to retaliate: being
left at liberty to act ossensively, as well by land as sea, they invaded the
enemies territory with their whole force in turn, and took Nisae, a strong
haven, with walls reaching unto the city of Nigara.

Proud of the first dawn of success, the first campaign being elapsed, during
the winter they expressed their triumph by public games at the funerals of
those that were slain in battle. They placed their bodies in tents three days
before the funeral; upon the fourth day coffins of cyprus was sent from the
tribes to convey the bones of their relations; the procession marched with
solemn pomp, attended by the inhabitants and strangers who visited the city;
their relations and children of the soldiers who were killed, stood weeping at
the sepulcher; those who fell at the battle of Marathon indeed were buried on
the field, but the rest received one common interment in a place called
Cerannicus. Pericles, who had contributed to the saving of his country,
contributed also to its honor, and pronounced a funeral oration over them,
which remains to this day, at once a mark of his eloquence and his gratitude.
But the joy of the public was not confined to empty praises, ceremonies, and
tears; a stipend was set apart for maintaining the widows and the orphans of
those who fell in the service of their country. And thus ended the first year
of the Peloponnesian war.

In the beginning of the ensuing summer, the Lacedaemonians renewed their
hostilities, and invaded the territories of Athens with the same number of men
as before. In this manner these capricious states went on to harrass and
depopulate each other: but a more terrible punishment now began to threaten
them from nature. A plague broke out in the city of Athens, a more terrible
than which is scarcely recorded in the annals of history. It is related, that
it began in Ethiopia, whence it descended into Egypt, from thence traveled
into Libya and Persia, and at last broke like a flood upon Athens. This
pestilence baffled the utmost efforts of art, the most robust constitutions
were unable to withstand its attacks, no skill could obviate, nor no remedy
dispel the terrible infection. The instant a person was seized, he was struck
with despair, which quite disabled him from attempting a cure. The humanity of
friends was fatal to themselves, as it was ineffectual to the unhappy
sufferers. The prodigious quantity of baggage which had been removed out of
their country into their city increased the calamity. Most of the inhabitants,
for want of lodging, lived in little cottages, in which they could scarce
breathe, while the burning heat of the summer increased the pestilential
malignity. They were seen confusedly huddled together, the dead as well as the
dying, some crawling through the streets, some lying along by the sides of
fountains, whither they had endeavored to repair to quench the raging thirst
which consumed them. Their very temples were filled with dead bodies, and every
part of the city exhibited a dreadful image of death, without the least remedy
for the present, or the least hopes with regard to futurity. It seized all with
such violence, that they fell one upon another as they passed along the
streets. It was also attended with such uncommon pestilential vapors, that the
very beasts and birds of prey, though famishing round the walls of the city,
would not touch the bodies of those who died of it. Even in those who
recovered, it left such a tincture of its malignity, that it struck upon their
senses. It effected the notices and memory of all the passages of their lives,
and they knew neither themselves nor their nearest relations. The circumstances
of this disease are described at large by Thucydides, who was sick of it
himself; and he observes, among other effects of it, that it introduced into
the city a more licentious way of living. For the people at first had recourse
to their gods to avert that judgment; but finding they were all alike infected,
whether they worshipped them or not, and that it was generally mortal, they
abandoned themselves at once to despair and riot: for since they held their
lives but as it were by the day, the^ were resolved to make the most of their
tim^ and money. The cause of it was generall^ imputed to Pericles, who, by
drawing suc^ numbers into the city, was thought to have corrupted the very air.
Yet, though this w^ raging within, and the enemy wasting t^ country without, he
was still in the same mi^ as before, that they ought not to put all the hopes
upon the issue of a battle. In the me^ time, the enemy advancing toward the
co^ laid waste the whole country, and returned, after having insulted the
wretched Athenians, already thinned by pestilence and famine.

Fickleness and inconstancy were the prevailing characters of the Athenians,
and as these carried them on a sudden to their greatest excesses, they soon
brought them back within the bounds of moderation and respect. Pericles had
been long a favorite; the calamities of the state at last began to render him
obnoxious; they had deposed him from the command of his army, but now repented
their rashness; and reinstated him a short time after, with more than former
authority. By dint of suffering, they began to bear patiently their domestic
misfortunes, and, impressed with a love for their country, asked pardon for their
former ingratitude. But he did not live long to enjoy his honors. He was
seized with the plague, which, like a malignant enemy, struck its severest blow
at parting. Being extremely ill and ready to breathe his last, the principal
citizens, and such of his friends that had not forsaken him, discoursing in his
bedchamber concerning the loss they were about to sustain, ran over his
exploits, and computed the number of his victories. They did not imagine that
Pericles attended to what they said, as he seemed insensible; but it was far
otherwise, for not a single word of their discourse had escaped him. At last,
cried he, why will you extol a series of actions, in which fortune had the
greatest part; there is one circumstance which I would not have forgotten, yet
which you have passed over; I could wish to have it remembered, as the most
glorious circumstance of my life, -- that I never yet caused a single citizen
to put on mourning.

Thus died Pericles, in whom were united a number of excellent qualities
without imparing each other. As well skilled in naval affairs as in the conduct
of armies; as well skilled in the arts of raising money as of employing it;
eloquent in public, and pleasing in private; he was a patron of artists, at
once informing them by his taste and example.

The most memorable transaction of the following years, was the siege of Platea
by the Lacedaemonians. This was one of the most famous sieges in antiquity, on
account of the vigorous efforts of both parties, but especially for the
glorious resistance made by the besieged, and the stratagems to escape the fury
of the assailants.

The Lacedaemonians besieged this place in the beginning of the third campaign.
As soon as they had fixed their camp round the city, in order to lay waste the
places adjacent, the Plataeans sent deputies to the Lacedaemonian general,
declaring the injustice of injuring them, who had received their liberties on a
former occasion from the Lacedaemonians themselves. The Lacedaemonians replied,
that there was but one method to insure their safety, which was to renew that
alliance by which they had originally procured their freedom; to disclaim their
Athenian supporters, and to unite with the Lacedaemonians, who had power and
will to protect them. The deputies replied, they could not possibly come to any
agreement without first sending to Athens, whither their wives and children
were retired. The Lacedaemonians permitted them to send thither, and the
Athenians solemnly promising to succor them to the utmost of their power, the
Plataeans resolved to suffer the last extremities rather than surrender, and
prepared for a vigorous defense, with a steady resolution to succeed or fall.

Archidamus, the Lacedaemonian general, after calling upon the gods to witness
that he did not first infringe the alliance, prepared for the siege with equal
perseverance. He surrounded the city with a circumvallation of trees, which
were laid very close together, their branches turned toward the city. He then
raised batteries upon them, and formed a terrace sufficient to support his
warlike machines. His army worked night and day without intermission sor
seventy days, one half of the soldiers reposing themselves while the others
were at work.

The besieged observing the works begin to rise round them, threw up a wooden
wall upon the walls of the city, opposite the platform, in order that they
might always out-top the besiegers. This wall was covered on the outside with
hydes both raw and dry, in order to shelter it from the besiegers fires. Thus
both walls seemed to vie with each other for superiority, till at last the
besieged, without amusing themselves at this work any longer, built another
within in the form of a half moon, behind which they might retire in case their
outer works were forced.

In the mean time, the besiegers having mounted their engines of war, shook the
city wall in a very terrible manner; which, though it alarmed the citizens, did
not however discourage them: they employed every art that fortification could
suggest against the enemy's batteries. They catched with ropes the heads of the
battering rams that were urged against them, and deadened their force with
levers. The besiegers finding their attack did not go on successfully, and that
a new wall was raised against their platform, despaired of being able to storm
the place; and, therefore, changed the siege into a blockade, after having
vainly attempted to set fire to the city, which was suddenly quenched by a
shower. The city was now surrounded by a brick wall, suddenly erected,
strengthened on each side by a deep ditch. The whole army was engaged
successively upon this wall, and when it was finished they left a guard over
half of it; the Boeotians offering to guard the other half, while the rest of
the army returned to Sparta.

In this manner the wretched Plataeans were cooped up by a strong wall without
any hopes of redress, and only awaited the mercy of the conqueror. There were
now in Plataea but four hundred inhabitants, and fourscore Athenians, with an
hundred and ten women to dress their victuals, and no other person, whether
freeman or slave, all the rest having having been sent to Athens before the
siege. At last the inhabitants of Plataea having lost all hopes of succor, and
being in the utmost want of provisions, formed a resolution to cut their way
through the enemy. But half of them struck with the greatness of the danger,
and the boldness of the enterprise, entirely lost courage when they came to the
execution, but the rest (who were about two hundred and twenty soldiers)
persisted in their resolution, and escaped in the following manner. The
besieged first took the height of the wall, by counting the rows of bricks
which composed it, and this they did at different times, and employed several
men for that purpose, in order that they might not mistake in the calculation.
This was the easier, because as the wall stood but at a small distance, every
part of it was very visible. They then made ladders of a proper length. All
things being now ready for executing the design, the besieged left the city one
night when there was no moon, in the midst of a storm of wind and rain. After
crossing the first ditch they drew near the wall undiscovered through the
darkness of the night, not to mention that the noise made by the rain and wind
prevented their being heard. They marched at some distance from one another, to
prevent the clashing of their arms, which were light, in order that those who
carried them might be the more active; and one of their legs was naked, to keep
them from sliding so easily in the mire. Those who carried the ladders laid
them in the space between the towers, where they knew no guard was posted,
because it rained. That instant twelve men mounted the ladders, armed with only
a coat of mail and a dagger, and marched directly to the towers, six on each
side. They were followed by soldiers armed only with javelins, that they might
mount the easier, and their shields were carried after them to be used in the
charge. When most of these were got to the top of the wall, they were
discovered by the falling of a tile, which one of their comrades in taking hold
of the parapet had thrown down. The alarm was immediately given from the
towers, and the whole army approached the wall, without discovering the
occasion of the outcry from the gloom of the night and the violence of the
storm. Besides which, those who had staid behind in the city, beat an alarm at
the same time in another quarter, to make a diversion, so that the enemy did
not know which way to turn themselves, and were afraid to quit their posts. But
a corpse de reserve of three hundred men, who were kept for any unforeseen
accident that might happen, quitted the contravallation, and ran to that part
where they heard the noise, and torches were held up toward Thebes, to show
that they must run that way. But those in the city, to render the signal of no
use, made others at the same time in different quarters, having prepared them
on the walls for that purpose. In the mean time, those who had mounted first
having possessed themselves of the two towers which flanked the interval where
the ladders were set, and having killed those who guarded them, posted
themselves there to defend the passage, and keep off the besiegers. Then
setting ladders on the top of the wall betwixt the two towers, they caused a
good number of their comrades to mount, in order to keep off, by the discharge
of their arrows, as well those who were advancing to the foot of the wall, as
the others who were hastening to the neighboring towers. Whilst this was doing
they had time to set up several ladders, and to throw down the parapet, that
the rest might come up with greater ease. As fast as they came up, they went
down on the other side, and drew up near the fosse, on the outside, to shoot at
those who appeared. After they were passed over, the men who were in the towers
came down last, and made to the fosse to follow after the rest. That instant
the guard, with three hundred torches came up. However, as the Plataeans saw
their enemies by this light better than they were seen by them, they therefore
took a surer aim, by which means the last crossed the ditch without being
attacked in their passage. However, this was not done without much difficulty,
because the ditch was frozen over, and the ice would not bear on account of
thaw and heavy rains. The violence of the storm was of great advantage to them.
After all were passed they took the road toward Thebes, the better to conceal
their retreat, because it was not likely they had fled toward a city of the
enemy's. Immediately they perceived the besiegers with torches in their hands
pursuing them in the road that led to Athens. After keeping that of Thebes
about six or seven stadia, they turned short toward the mountain, and resumed
the route of Athens, whither two hundred and twelve arrived out of two hundred
and twenty, who had quitted the place, the rest having returned back to it
through fear, one archer excepted, who was taken on the side of the fosse of
contravallation. The besiegers, after having pursued them to no purpose,
returned to their camp. In the mean time, the Plataeans, who remained in the
city, supposing that all their companions had been killed, (because those who
were returned, to justify themselves, affirmed they were) sent a herald to
demand their dead bodies, but being told the true state of the affair, he
withdrew. At the end of the following campaign, the Plataeans being in absolute
want of provisions, and unable to make the least defense, surrendered upon
condition that they should not be punished till they had been tried and
adjudged in form of justice. Five commissioners came for this purpose from
Lacedaemon, and these without charging them with any crime, barely asked them
whether they had done any service to the Lacedaemonians and the allies in this
war? The Plataeans were much surprised, as well as puzzled at this question,
and were sensible, that it had been suggested by the Thebans, their professed
enemies, who had vowed their destruction. They, therefore, put the
Lacedaemonians in mind of the services they had done to Greece in general, both
at the battle of Artemisium and that of Plataea, and particularly in
Lacedaemonia at the time of the earthquake, which was followed by the revolt of
their slaves. The only reason they declared their having joined the Athenians
afterward, was to defend themselves from the hostilities of the Thebans,
against whom they had implored the assistance of the Lacedaemonians to no
purpose. That if that was imputed to them as a crime, which was only their
misfortune, it ought not, however, entirely to obliterate the remembrance of
their former services. "Cast your eyes, said they, on the monuments of your
ancestors which you see here, to whom we annually pay all the honors which can
be rendered to the names of the dead. You thought fit to entrust their bodies
with us, as we were eyewitnesses of their bravery. And yet you will now give
up their ashes to their murderers, in abandoning us to the Thebans who fought
against them at the battle of Plataea? Will you enslave a province where Greece
recovered its liberty? Will you destroy the temples of those gods to whom you
owed the victory? Will you abolish the memory of their founders who contributed
so greatly to your safety? On this occasion, we may venture to say, our
interest is inseparable from your glory, and you cannot deliver up your ancient
friends and benefactors to the unjust hatred of the Thebans, without eternal
infamy to yourselves." One would conclude, that these just remonstrances should
have made some impression on the Lacedaemonians, but they were biassed more by
the answer the Thebans made, and which was expressed in the most haughty and
bitter terms against the Plataeans; and besides, they had brought their
instructions from Lacedaemon. They stood, therefore, to their first question,
Whether the Plataeans had done them any service since the war? and making them
pass one after another, as they severally answered No, each was immediately
butchered, and not one escaped. About two hundred were killed in this manner,
and twenty-five Athenians, who were among them, met with the same unhappy fate.
Their wives, who had been taken prisoners, were made slaves. The Thebans
afterward peopled their city with exiles from Megara and Plataea, but the year
after they demolished it entirely. It was in this manner the Lacedaemonians, in
the hopes of reaping great advantages from the Thebans, sacrificed the
Plataeans to their animosity, ninety-three years after their first alliance
with the Athenians.

I pass over several particular incidents of the succeeding campaign, in which
the Grecian states mutually destroyed each other, without promoting general
happiness, or establishing any common form of government. The fluctuations of
success were various. The Athenians took the city of Pylus from the
Lacedaemonians; and they, on the other hand, made annual incursions into
Attica. More than one overture for a peace was made by Cleon, who had a great
ascendant among the Athenians, and prevented their taking effect. The war was,
therefore, renewed with all its former animosities. The island of Pylus became
the scene of mutual contention. Demosthenes, who afterward became the
celebrated orator, being joined in commission with Cleon, landed on the island,
in order to dispossess the Lacedaemonians, who still remained there. They
attacked the enemy with great vigor, drove them from post to post, and gaining
ground perpetually, at last forced them to the extremity of the island. The
Lacedaemonians had stormed a fort that was thought inaccessible. There they
drew up in battle array, faced about to that side only where they could be
attacked, and defended themselves like so many lions. As the engagement had
held the greatest part of the day, and the soldiers were oppressed with heat
and weariness, and parched with thirst, the general of the Messenians directed
himself to Cleon and Demosthenes, said, that all their efforts would be to no
purpose, unless they charged their enemy's rear, and promised, if they would
give him but some troops, armed with missive weapons, that he would endeavor
to find a passage. Accordingly, he and his followers climbed up certain steep
and craggy places, which were not guarded, when, coming down unperceived into
the fort, he appeared on a sudden at the backs of the Lacedaemonians, which
entirely damped their courage, and afterward completed their overthrow. They
now made but a very feeble resistance, and being oppressed with numbers,
attacked on all sides, and dejected through fatigue and despair, they began to
give way: but the Athenians seized on all the passes to cut off their retreat.
Cleon and Demosthenes finding, that should the battle continue, not a man of
them would escape, and being desirous of carrying them alive to Athens, they
commanded their soldiers to desist, and caused proclamation to be made by a
herald for them to lay down their arms, and surrender at discretion. At these
words the greatest part lowered their shields, and clapped their hands in token
of approbation. A kind of suspension of arms was agreed upon, and their
commander desired leave might be granted him to dispatch a messenger to the
camp to know the resolution of the generals. This was not allowed, but they
called heralds from the coast, and after several messages, a Lacedaemonian
advanced forward, and cried aloud, that they were permitted to treat with the
enemy, provided they did not submit to dishonorable terms. Upon this, they
held a conference, after which they surrendered at discretion, and were kept
till the next day. The Athenians then raising a trophy, and restoring the
Lacedaemonians their dead, embarked for their own country, after distributing
the prisoners among the several ships, and committing the guard of them to the
captains of the galleys. In this battle one hundred and twenty-eight
Lacedaemonians fell out of four hundred and twenty, which was their number at
first, so that there survived not quite three hundred, an hundred and twenty of
whom were inhabitants of the city of Sparta. The siege of the island (to
compute from the beginning of it, including the time employed in the truce) had
lasted threescore and twelve days. They all now left Pylus, and Cleon's
promise, though so vain and rash, was found literally true. But the most
surprising circumstance was the capitulation that had been made; for, it was
believed, that the Lacedaemonians, so far from surrendering their arms, would
die sword-in hand. Being come to Athens, they were ordered to remain prisoners
till a peace should be concluded, provided the Lacedaemonians did not make any
incursions into their country, for that then they should all be put to death.
They left a garrison in Pylus. The Messenians of Naupactus, who had formerly
possessed it, sent thither the flower of their youth, who very much infested
the Lacedaemonians by their incursions; and, as these Messenians spoke the
language of the country, they prevailed with a great number of slaves to join
them. The Lacedaemonians dreading a greater evil, sent several deputations to
Athens, but to no purpose, the Athenians being too much elated with their
prosperity, and especially their late success, to listen to any terms. For two
or three years successively hostilities were carried on with alternate success,
and nothing but the humbling of the one or the other of the two rival states
could decide the quarrel. The Athenians made themselves masters of the island
of Cythera; but, on the other hand, were defeated by the Lacedaemonians at
Dellion. At length, the two nations began to grow weary of a war, which put
them to great expense, and did not procure them any real advantage. A truce for
a year was, therefore, concluded between them, which being expired, served to
pave the way for a more lasting reconciliation. The death of the two generals
that commanded the contending armies, served not a little to hasten this event.
Brassidas, the Lacedaemonian, was killed as he was conducting a sally, when
besieged in Amphipolis; and Cleon, the Athenian, despising an enemy to which he
knew himself superior, was set upon unawares, and, slying for safety, was
killed by a soldier who happened to meet him. Thus, these two men, who had long
opposed the tranquillity of Greece, and raised their reputations but in a very
different way, fell a sacrifice to their own ambition.

They were, however, men of very opposite characters. Brasidas had courage and
conduct, moderation and integrity; and, it was he alone who at this time kept
up the sinking reputation of his country. He was the only Spartan since
Pausanias who appeared with any established character among the confederates,
to whom he behaved so well, that they were again brought under the dependence
of Sparta; and several cities came in to him as their common deliverer from the
tyranny of Athens. The inhabitants of Amphipolis, besides their joining with
the other allies in solemnizing his funeral in a public manner, instituted
anniversary games, and sacrifices to his memory as an hero; and so far
considered him as their founder, that they destroyed all the monuments which
had been preserved as marks of their being an Athenian colony. His opposition
to the peace was not so much the effects of his obstinacy, as of a true Spartan
zeal for the honor of his country, which he was sensible had been treated by
the Athenians with too much insolence and contempt. He had now a fair prospect
of bringing them to reason, as he was gaining ground upon them, and every day
making fresh conquests: and, however he might be transported with the glory of
performing great actions, yet the main end of his ambition seems to have been,
the bringing the war to an happy conclusion, I must not here omit the generous
answer his mother made to the persons who brought her the news of his death.
Upon her asking them whether he died honorably, they naturally fell into
encomiums on his great exploits, and his personal bravery, and preferred him to
all the generals of his time; "Yes, said she, my son was a valiant man, but
Sparta has still many citizens braver than he."

Cleon was another sort of m^n. He was rash, arrogant, and obstinate,
contentious, envious, and malicious, covetous and corrupt, and yet, with all
these bad qualities, he had some little arts of popularity which raised and
supported him. He made it his business to caress the old men; and, as much as
he loved money, he often relieved the poor. He had a ready wit, with a way of
drollery, that took with many, though with the generality it passed for
impudence and buffoonry. He had one very refined way of recommending himself,
which was, upon his coming into power, to discard all his old friends, for fear
it should be thought he would be biassed by them. At the same time, he picked
up a vile set of sycophants in their room, and made a servile court to the
lowest dregs of the people; and yet, even they had so bad an opinion of him,
that they often declared against him for Nicias, his professed enemy; who,
though he took part with the nobility, still preserved an interest in the
commons, and was more generally respected. That which Cleon chiefly depended
on, was his eloquence; but it was of a boisterous kind, verbose and petulant,
and consisted more in the vehemence of his style and utterance, and the
distortion of his action and gesture, than in the strength of his reasoning. By
this furious manner of harranguing, he introduced among the orators and
statesmen a licentiousness and indecency which were not known before, and which
gave rise to the many riotous and disorderly proceedings which were afterward
in the assemblies, when almost every thing was carried by noise and tumult. In
the military part of his service, he was as unaccountable as in the rest of his
conduct. He was not naturally formed for war, and only made use of it as a
cloak for his ill practices, and because he could not carry on his other views
without it. His taking Sphacteria was certainly a great action, but it was a
rash and desperate one; and it has been shown how he was undesignedly drawn
into it by a boast of his own. However, he was so elated with the success of
that expedition, that he fancied himself a general, and the people were brought
to have the same opinion. But the event soon undeceived them, and convinced
them that he knew better how to lead in the assembly than in the field. In
reality, he was not a man to be trusted in either. For, in the one he was more
of a blusterer than of a soldier, and in the other, he had more of an
incendiary than of a patriot.

The Lacedaemonians were no less inclined to peace than the Athenians and were
glad to treat at this time while they could do it with honor: besides, they
had nothing more at heart than the imprisonment of their men taken at Pylus,
they being the chief of their city; and, among other considerations, it was not
the least, that the truce which they had made for Argos for thirty years, was
just upon expiring. This was a strong and flourishing city, and though it was
not of itself a match for Sparta, yet they knew it was far from being
contemptible, and that it held too good a correspondence with its neighbors,
not to make itself capable of giving them a great deal of uneasiness. The
matter having been canvassed and debated most part of the winter, the
Lacedaemonians, to bring the treaty to a conclusion, gave out, that they
resolved as soon as the season would permit to fortify in Attica. Upon which,
the Athenians grew more moderate in their demands, and a peace was concluded in
the tenth year of the war between the two states and their confederates for
fifty years. The chief articles being, that the garrisons should be evacuated,
and the towns and prisoners restored on both sides. This was called the Nician
peace, because Nicias, who was just the reverse of his rival Cleon, was the
chief instrument in it. Besides the tender concern he always expressed for his
country, he had more particular ends in it, in securing his reputation. For he
had been upon many expeditions, and had generally succeeded in them; but yet he
was sensible how much he owed to his good fortune and his cautious management,
and he did not care to risque what he had already got for the hopes of more.

CHAP. VIII. From the Peace of NICIAS to the end of the PELOPONNESSIAN War.
EVERY thing now promised a restoration of former tranquillity. The Boeotians
and Corinthians were the first that showed signs of discontent, and used their
utmost endeavors to excite fresh troubles. To obviate any dangers arising from
that quarter, the Athenians and Lacedaemonians united in a league offensive and
defensive, which served to render them more formidable to their neighboring
states, and more assured with regard to each other. Yet still the former
animosities and jealousies fermented at bottom, and while friendship seemed to
gloss over external appearances, fresh discontents were gathering below. The
character indeed of Nicias was peaceable, and he did all in his power to
persuade the Athenians to cultivate their general tranquillity. But a new
promoter of troubles was now beginning to make his appearance, and from him,
those who wished for peace had every thing to fear. This was no other than the
celebrated Alcibiades, the disciple of Socrates, a youth equally remarkable for
the beauty of his person and the greatness of his mental accomplishments.

The strict intimacy between Alcibiades and Socrates is one of the most
remarkable circumstances of his life. This philosopher observing excellent
natural qualities in him, which were greatly heightened by the beauty of his
person, bestowed incredible pains in cultivating so valuable a plant, lest,
being neglected, it should wither as it grew, and absolutely degenerate: and,
indeed, Alcibiades was exposed to numberless dangers; the greatness of his
extraction, his vast riches, the authority of his family, the credit of his
guardians, his personal talents, his exquisite beauty, and, still more than
these, the flattery and complaisance of all who approached him. One would have
concluded, says Plutarch, that fortune had surrounded and invested him with all
these pretended advantages, as with so many ramparts and bulwarks, to render
him inaccessible and invulnerable to all the darts of philosophy, those
salutary darts which strike to the very heart, and leave in it the strongest
incitements to virtue and solid glory. But those very obstacles redoubled the
zeal of Socrates. Notwithstanding the strong endeavors that were used to
divert this young Athenian from a correspondence which alone was capable of
securing him from so many snares, he devoted himself entirely to it; he had the
most unbounded wit; he was fully sensible of Socrates's extraordinary merit,
and could not resist the charms of his sweetly insinuating eloquence, which at
that time had a greater ascendent over him than the allurements of pleasure. He
was so zealous a disciple of that great master, that he followed him wherever
he went, took the utmost delight in his conversation, was extremely well
pleased with his principles, received his instructions, and even his
reprimands, with wonderful docility, and was so moved with his discourses, as
even to shed tears and abhor himself; so weighty was the force of truth in the
mouth of Socrates, and in so odious a light did he expose the vices to which
Alcibiades abandoned himself. Alcibiades in those moments when he listened to
Socrates, differed so much from himself, that he appeared quite another man.
However, his headstrong fiery temper, and his natural fondness for pleasure,
which was heightened and inflamed by the discourses and advice of young people,
soon plunged him into his former irregularities, and tore him as it were from
his master^, who was obliged to pursue him as a slave who had escaped
correction. This vicissitude of flights and returns of virtuous resolutions and
relapses into vice, continued a long time, but still Socrates was not disgusted
by his levity, and always flattered himself with the hopes of bringing him back
to his duty; and hence certainly arose the strong mixture of good and evil that
always appeared in his conduct; the instructions which his master had given him
sometimes prevailing, and, at other times, the fire of his passions hurrying
him, in a manner, against his own will into things of a quite opposite nature.
Among the various passions that were discovered in him, the strongest and most
prevailing was a haughty turn of mind, which would force all things to submit
to it, and could not bear a superior, or even an equal. Although his birth and
uncommon talents smoothed the way to his attaining the highest employments in
the republic, there was nothing however to which he was so fond of owing the
credit and authority he wanted to gain over the people, as to the force of his
eloquence, and the persuasive grace of his orations. To this, his intimacy with
Socrates might be of great service. Alcibiades with such a cast of mind as we
here described, was not born for repose, and had set every engine at work to
traverse the treaty lately concluded between the two states, but not succeeding
in his attempt, he endeavored to prevent its taking effect. He was disgusted
at the Lacedaemonians, because they directed themselves only to Nicias, of whom
they had a very high opinion; and, on the contrary, seemed to take no manner of
notice of him, though his ancestors had enjoyed the rights of hospitality among
them. The first thing he did to infringe the peace was this: having been
informed that the people of Argos only wanted an opportunity to break with the
Spartans, whom they equally hated and feared, he flattered them secretly with
the hopes that the Athenians would succor them, by suggesting to them, that
they were ready to break a peace which was no way advantageous to them.
Accordingly, he laid hold of this juncture, and improved the pretext the
Lacedaemonians had given to exasperate the people both against them and Nicias;
which had so good an effect, that every thing seemed disposed for a treaty with
Argos: of which, the Lacedaemonians being very apprehensive, immediately
dispatched their ambassadors to Athens, who at first said what seemed very
satisfactory, that they came with full power to concert all matters in
difference upon equal terms. The council received their propositions, and the
people were to assemble the next day to give them audience. Alcibiades, in the
mean while, fearing lest this negotiation would ruin his designs, had a secret
conference with the ambassadors, and persuaded them, under a color of
friendship, not to let the people know at first what full powers their
commission gave them, but intimate, that they came only to treat and make
proposals, for that otherwise they would grow insolent in their demands, and
extort from them such unreasonable terms as they could not with honor consent
to. They were so well satisfied with the prudence and sincerity of this advice,
that he drew them from Nicias to rely entirely upon himself: and, the next day,
when the people were assembled, and the ambassadors introduced, Alcibiades,
with a very obliging air, demanded of them with what powers they were come?
They made answer, that they were not come as plenipotentiaries. Upon which he
instantly changed his voice and countenance, and exclaiming against them as
notorious liars, bid the people take care how they transacted any thing with
men on whom they could have so little dependence. The people dismissed the
ambassadors in a rage, and Nicias knowing nothing of the deceit, was confounded
and in disgrace. To redeem his credit, he proposed being sent once more to
Sparta: but not being able to gain such terms there as the Athenians demanded,
they immediately upon his return struck up a league with the Argives for an
hundred years, including the Eleans and Mantineans, which yet did not in terms
cancel that with the Lacedaemonians, though it is plain, that the whole intent
of it was levelled against them. Upon this new alliance, Alcibiades was
declared general; and though his best friends could not commend the method by
which he brought about his designs, yet it was looked upon as a great reach in
politics, thus to divide and shake almost all Peloponnesus, and to remove the
war so far from the Athenian frontier, that even success would profit the enemy
but little should they be conquerors; whereas, if they were defeated, Sparta
itself would be hardly safe.

This defection of the confederates began to awaken the jealousy of Sparta,
they resolved, therefore, to remedy the evil before it spread too far;
wherefore, drawing out their whole force, both of citizens and slaves, and
being joined by their allies, they encamped almost under the walls of Argos.
The Argives having notice of their march, made all possible preparations, and
came out with a full resolution to fight them. But just as they were going to
engage, two of their officers went over to Agis, the Spartan king and general,
and proposed to him to have the business made up by a reference. He immediately
closing with the offer, in order to it, granted them a truce for four months,
and drew off his army; the whole affair being transacted by these three,
without any general consent or knowledge on either side. The Peloponnesians,
though they durst not disobey their orders, inveighed grievously against Agis
for letting such an advantage slip as they could never promise to themselves
again. For they had actually hemmed in the enemy, and that with the best, if
not the greatest army, that ever was brought into the field. And the Argives
were so little apprehensive of danger on their side, that they were no less
incensed against their mediators, one of whom they forced to the altars to save
his life, and confiscated his goods.

Thus every thing seemed to favor the Athenian interest; and their prosperity,
for this was the most flourishing period of their duration, blinded them to
such a degree, that they were persuaded no power was able to resist them. In
this disposition they resolved to take the first opportunity of adding the
island of Sicily to their empire, and soon an occasion offered to their wish.
Ambassadors were sent from the people of Egesta, who, in quality of their
allies, came to implore their aid against the inhabitants of Selinuta, who were
assisted by the Syracusans. It was the sixteenth year of the Peloponnesian war.
They represented, among other things, that should they be abandoned, the
Syracusans, after seizing their city, as they had done that of Leontium, would
possess themselves of all Sicily, and not fail to aid the Peloponnesians, who
were their founders; and, that they might put them to as little charge as
possible, they offered to pay the troops that should be sent to succor them.
The Athenians, who had long waited for an opportunity to declare themselves,
sent deputies to Egesta to enquire into the state of affairs, and to see
whether there was money enough in the treasury to defray the expense of so
great a war. The inhabitants of that city had been so artful as to borrow from
the neighboring nations a great number of gold and silver vases, worth an
immense sum of money, and of these they made a show when the Athenians arrived.
The deputies returned with those of Egesta, who carried threescore talents in
ingots, as a month's pay for the galleys which they demanded and a promise of
larger sums, which they said were ready both in the public treasury and in the
temples. The people struck with these fair appearances, the truth of which they
did not give themselves the leisure to examine; and, seduced by the
advantageous reports which their deputies made with the view of pleasing them,
immediately granted the Egestans their demand, and appointed Alcibiades,
Nicias, and Lamachus, to command the fleet, with full power not only to succor
Egesta, and restore the inhabitants of Leontium to their city, but also to
regulate the affairs of Sicily, in such a manner as might best suit the
interests of the republic. Nicias was appointed one of the generals to his very
great regret; for, besides other motives, which made him dread that command, he
shunned it because Alcibiades was to be his colleague. But the Athenians
promised themselves greater success from this war, should they not resign the
whole conduct of it to Alcibiades, but temper his ardour and audacity with the
coldness and wisdom of Nicias. Nicias not daring to oppose Alcibiades openly,
endeavored to do it indirectly, by starting a great number of difficulties,
drawn particularly from the great expense of this expedition. He declared, that
since they were resolved upon war, they ought to carry it on in such a manner
as might suit the exalted reputation to which Athens had attained. That a fleet
was not sufficient to oppose so formidable a power as that of the Syracusans
and their allies: that they must raise an army composed of good horse and foot,
if they desired to act in a manner worthy of so noble a design; that, besides
their fleet, which was to make them masters at sea, they must have a great
number of transports to carry provisions perpetually to the army, which
otherwise could not possibly subsist in an enemy's country: that they must
carry vast sums of money with them, without waiting for that promised them by
the citizens of Egesta, who perhaps were ready in words only, and very probably
might break their promise: that they ought to weigh and examine the disparity
there was between themselves and their enemies with regard to the conveniences
and wants of the army, the Syracusans being in their own country, in the midst
of powerful allies, disposed by inclination, as well as engaged by interest, to
assist them with men, arms, horses, and provisions; whereas, the Athenians
would carry on the war in a remote country, possessed by their enemies, where,
in the winter, news could not be brought them in less than four months time; a
country where all things would oppose the Athenians, and nothing be procured
but by force of arms: that it would reflect the greatest ignominy on the
Athenians, should they be forced to abandon their enterprise, and thereby
become the scorn and contempt of their enemies, by their neglecting to take all
the precautions which so important a design required: that as for himself, he
was determined not to go unless he was provided with all things necessary for
the expedition, because the safety of the whole army depended on that
circumstance; and that he would not rely on caprice, or the precarious
engagements of the allies. Nicias had flattered himself, that this speech would
cool the ardour of the people, whereas it only inflamed it the more.
Immediately the generals had full powers given them to raise as many troops,
and fit out as many galleys as they should judge necessary; and the levies were
accordingly carried on in Athens, and other places, with inexpressible activity.

When prepared, they accordingly set sail, after having appointed Corcyra the
rendezvous for most of the allies, and such ships as were to carry the
provisions and warlike stores. All the citizens, as well as foreigners in
Athens, flocked by daybreak to the port of Pyraeus. The former attended by
their children, relations, friends, and companions, with a joy overcast with a
little sorrow, upon their bidding adieu to persons that were as dear to them as
life, who were setting out on a distant and very dangerous expedition, from
which it was uncertain whether they would ever return, though they flattered
themselves with the hopes that it would be successful. The foreigners came
thither to feed their eyes with a sight which was highly worthy their
curiosity, for no single city in the world had ever fitted out so gallant a
fleet. Those indeed which had been sent against Epidaurus and Potidaea, were as
considerable with regard to the number of soldiers and ships, but then they
were not equipped with so much magnificence, neither was their voyage so long,
nor their enterprise so important. Here were seen a land and a naval army
provided with the utmost care, and at the expense of particular persons, as
well as of the public, with all things necessary on account of the length of
the voyage, and the duration of the war. The city furnished an hundred empty
galleys, that is threescore light ones, and forty to transport the soldiers
heavily armed. Every mariner received daily a dram, or ten pence English,
for his pay, exclusively of what the captains of ships gave the rowers of the
first bench. Add to this, the pomp and magnificence that was displayed
universally, every one striving to eclipse the rest, and each captain
endeavoring to make his ship the lightest, and, at the same time, the gayest
in the whole fleet. I shall not take notice of the choice of the soldiers and
seamen, who were the flower of the Athenians, nor of their emulation with
regard to the beauty and neatness of their arms and equipage, any more than of
their officers, who had laid out considerable sums purely to distinguish
themselves, and to give foreigners an advantageous idea of their persons and
circumstances, so that this sight had the air of a pageant, in which the utmost
magnificence is displayed, rather than of a warlike expedition. But the
boldness and greatness of the design still exceeded its expense and splendour.

When the ships were loaded, and the troops got on board, the trumpet sounded,
and solemn prayers were offered up for the success of the expedition; gold and
silver cups were filling every where with wine, and the accustomed libations
were poured out; the people who lined the shore shouting, at the same time, and
lifting up their hands to heaven to wish their fellow-citizens a good voyage
and success. And now the hymn being sung, and the ceremonies ended, the ships
sailed one after another out of the harbor, after which they strove to outsail
one another, till the whole fleet met at Aegina. From thence it made to to
Corcyra, where the army of the allies was assembled with the rest of the fleet.

Being now arrived at Sicily, the generals were divided in their opinions as to
the place where they should make a descent. Lamachus, one of the generals, was
for making directly for Syracuse. He urged, that it was as yet unprovided, and
under the greatest consternation; that an army was always most terrible on its
approach before the enemy had time to recollect and make danger familiar; these
reasons, however, were overruled. It was agreed to reduce the smaller cities
first, when having detached ten galleys only to take a view of the situation
and harbor of Syracuse, they landed with the rest of their forces, and
surprised Catana.

In the mean time, the enemies of Alcibiades had taken occasion from his
absence, to attack him with redoubled vigor. They aggravated his misconduct in
neglecting the proper method of attack, and enforced their accusation, by
alleging, that he had profaned the mysteries of Ceres; this was sufficient to
induce the giddy multitude to recall their general, but for fear of raising a
tumult in the army, they only sent him orders to return to Athens to pacify the
people by his presence. Alcibiades obeyed the orders with seeming submission,
but reflecting on the inconstancy and caprice of his judges, the instant he was
arrived at Thurium, and had got on shore, he disappeared, and eluded the
pursuit of those who sought after him; the galley, therefore, returned without
him, and the people in a rage condemned him to death for his contumacy. His
whole estate was confiscated, and all the orders of religion were commanded to
curse him. Some time after, news being brought him that the Athenians had
condemned him to death; I hope one day, says he, to make them sensible that I
am still alive.

The Syracusans had by this time put themselves in a posture of defense, and
finding that Nicias did not advance toward them, they talked of attacking him
in his camp; and some of them asked, in a scoffing way, Whether he was come
into Sicily to settle at Catana? He was roused by this insult, and resolved to
make the best of his way to Syracuse. He durst not attempt it by land for want
of cavalry, and he thought it equally hazardous to make a descent by sea upon
an enemy who was so well prepared to receive him: however, he chose the latter
way, and succeeded in it by a stratagem. He had gained a citizen of Catana to
go as a deserter to the Syracusans, and informed them, that the Athenians lay
every night in the town without their arms; and that early in the morning, on a
certain day appointed, they might surprise them, seize on their camp with all
their arms and baggage, burn their fleet in the harbor, and destroy the whole
army. The Syracusans gave credit to him, and marched with all their forces
toward Catana; which Nicias had no sooner notice of, but he embarked his
troops, and steering away for Syracuse, landed them there the next morning, and
fortified himself in the out-skirts of the town. The Syracusans were so
provoked at this trick being put upon them, that they immediately returned to
Syracuse, and presented themselves without the walls in order of battle. Nicias
marched out of his trenches to meet them, and a very sharp action ensued,
wherein, at length, the Athenians got the better, and forced the enemy back to
the city, after having killed two hundred and sixty of them and their
confederates, with the loss of fifty of their own men. They were not as yet in
a condition to attack the city, and therefore took up their winter quarters at
Catana and Naxus.

The year following greater projects were undertaken, for, having received a
supply of horse from Athens, with provisions, and other stores of war, Nicias
set sail for Syracuse, in order to block it up by sea and land. In this manner
did the little state of Athens spread terror among all the neighboring states,
and now risen to its utmost height, began to aspire at universal empire. Athens
had already been the mistress of arts and philosophy, it now, with inverted
ambition, aimed at setting mankind an example of the arts of conquest and of
war, but they had never considered that a petty state raised artificially into
power, is liable to a thousand accidents in its way to conquest; they had now
sent out their whole force into Sicily, and while they fought to decide the
fate of Syracuse, they were in fact contending for their own; the existence of
Athens and Syracuse depended so much on the event of the present invasion, that
both sides fought with the utmost perseverance, and historians have been minute
in the detail.

The siege was now carried on in a more regular and skilful manner than had
ever been practiced before, and men were taught a new lesson now, as well in
the arts of attack as of defense. Nicias found it necessary, in the first
place, to gain Epipolae, an high hill which commanded the city, and had a steep
craggy passage up to it. The Syracusans were so sensible of the importance of
this post, that they had ordered a detachment of seven hundred men to march
upon a signal given to the defense of it. But Nicias had landed his men in a
little remote harbor so secretly and so suddenly, that they easily made
themselves masters of it. And the seven hundred running up from the plains in a
confused manner to dispossess them, were repulsed with the loss of three
hundred of them and their leader. Nicias built a fort there, as a magazine, and
proceeded to invest the town on the land-side, so as to prevent any
communication with the country. The enemy endeavoring to defeat his works, and
render them useless, several skirmishes ensued, wherein the Athenians had
generally the better: but, in one of them, Lamachus being pressed hard, and
abandoned by his men, was killed. The Syracusans being still intent on the
recovery of Epipolae, ordered up another detachment thither. Nicias was at this
time sick in the fort, and in bed, with only his servants about him. But when
he found the enemy were forcing his intrenchments, he got up and set fire to
the engines, and other wood that lay scattered about the fort; which had so
good an effect, that it served as a signal to his own troops to come up to his
relief, and so terrified and confounded those of the enemy, that they retreated
into the city. From thenceforth, Nicias, who was now sole general, conceived
great hopes; for several cities of Sicily, which hitherto had not declared for
either side, came and joined him, and there arrived from all quarters vessels
laden with provisions for his army, all parties being eager to go over to him,
because he had acquired the superiority, and been exceedingly successful in all
his undertakings. The Syracusans seeing themselves blocked up both by sea and
land, and losing all hopes of being able to defend their city any longer,
already proposed an accommodation. Gylippus, who was coming from Lacedaemon to
their assistance, having heard in his passage the extremity to which they were
reduced, and looking upon the whole island as lost, sailed forward
nevertheless, not in the view of defending Sicily, but only to preserve to the
nations of Italy such cities as were subject to them in that island, if it were
not too late, and if this could be done; for fame had declared in all places,
that the Athenians had already possessed themselves of the whole island, and
were headed by a general whose wisdom and good fortune rendered him invincible.

The ^ortifications of the Athenians were now almost completed, they had drawn
a double wall near half a league in length along the plain and the fens toward
the great port, and had almost reached it. There now remained on one side only
a small part of the wall to be finished, and the Syracusans were upon the brink
of ruin; they had no hopes left; they were unable to defend themselves, and
they knew not where to look for succors; for this reason, they resolved to
surrender, and a council was held to settle the articles of capitulation which
were to be presented to Nicias.

It was at that very instant, and in this most distressful juncture, that a
messenger arrived at Syracuse from Corinth with news of speedy relief. The
whole body of citizens flocked round the messenger of such welcome information.
He gave them to understand, that Gylippus, the Lacedaemonian general, would be
with them immediately, and was followed by a great many other galleys which
came to his aid. The Syracusans astonished, or rather stupefied as it were with
this news, could scarce believe what they heard. Whilst they were thus
sluctuating and in doubt, a courier arrived from Gylippus to inform them of his
approach, and ordered them to march over all their troops to meet him. He
himself after taking a fort in his way, marched in order of battle directly for
Epipolae, and ascending by Euryclus as the Athenians had done, he prepared to
attack them from without, whilst the Syracusians should charge them on their
side with the forces of Syracuse. The Athenians, exceedingly surprised by his
arrival, drew up hastily, and without order under the wall; with regard to
himself, laying down his arms when he approached, he sent word by a herald,
that he would allow the Athenians five days to leave Sicily. Nicias did not
condescend to make the least answer to this proposal; and some of his soldiers
bursting out a laughing, asked the herald, whether the presence of a
Lacedaemonian privateer, and the trifling wand of an herald, could make any
change in the present state of the city? Both sides, therefore, prepared for
battle.

Gylippus began by storming the fort of Labdalla, and cutting in pieces all who
were found in it. The Athenians, in the mean time, were not idle in forming
entrenchments to oppose him, while the besieged were equally assiduous in
cutting down and breaking through those walls and circumvallations which were
carried round their city. At length, both sides drew up their forces in battle
array between the walls, which the Athenians had raised to keep off the enemy.
In the first engagement the cavalry of Gylippus being rendered useless from the
narrowness of the place, to re-animate his soldiers, by doing them justice, he
had the courage to reproach himself for the ill success they had met with, and
to declare publicly, that he, not they, had occasioned the late defeat, because
he had made them fight in too narrow a spot of ground. However, he promised
soon to give them an opportunity of recovering both their honor and his; and,
accordingly, the very next day he led them against the enemy, after having
exhorted them in the strongest terms to behave in a manner worthy of their
ancient glory. Nicias perceiving, that though he should not desire to come to a
battle, it would, however, be absolutely necessary for him to prevent the enemy
from extending their line beyond the contravallation, to which they were
already very near, (because otherwise this would be granting them a certain
victory) therefore, marched boldly against the Syracusans. Gylippus brought up
his troops beyond that place where the walls terminated on both sides, in order
that he might leave the more room to extend his battle, when, charging the
enemy's left wing with his horse, he put it to flight, and soon after defeated
their right. We have an instance of what the experience and abilities of a
great captain are capable of producing; for Gylippus, with the same men, the
same arms, the same horses, and the same ground, by only changing his order of
battle, defeated the Athenians, and beat them quite to their camp. The
following night the victors carried on their wall beyond the contravallation of
the Athenians, and thereby deprived them of all hopes of being ever able to
surround the city. Nicias had ever since the arrival of Gylippus been put upon
the defensive, and as he daily lost ground in the country, he retired toward
the sea, to keep that open in case of accidents, and to bring in provisions.
For this purpose, he possessed himself of Plemmyrium, near the great harbor,
where he built three forts, and kept himself up as it were in garrison.
Gylippus took this opportunity to gain over the inland cities; and, at the same
time, arrived the fleet which was expected from Corinth. Nicias, under these
circumstances, wrote a very melancholy account of his affairs to Athens; that
the enemy were become so superior to him, that he was not in a condition to
force their intrenchments; and, that instead of besieging them, he was now
besieged himself; that the towns revolted from him; the slaves and mercenaries
deserted; that his troops were employed in guarding the forts and fetching in
provisions, and that in this latter service many of them were cut off by the
enemy's horse. That the fleet was in as bad a condition as the army; and that,
in short, without a speedy reinforcement of men, ships, and money, equal to
what he had at first set out with, it was in vain to attempt any thing farther:
then, as to his own particular, he complained of his being afflicted with sharp
nephritic pains, which rendered him incapable of going on with the service;
and, therefore, pressed to be recalled." The Athenians were so affected with
this letter, that they named Eurymedon and Demosthenes to go over with fresh
supplies, the former immediately with ten galleys, and the other early in the
spring with a stronger force. At the same time, they appointed Menander and
Euthydemus to act as assistants to Nicias, but would not grant his request of
coming home. In the mean time, Gylippus, who had made the tour of Sicily,
returned with as many men as he could raise in the whole island, and prevailed
with the Syracusans to fit out the strongest sleet in their power, and to
hazard a battle at sea, upon the presumption that the success would answer the
greatness of the enterprise. This advice was strongly enforced by Hermocrates,
who exhorted the Syracusans not to abandon to their enemies the empire of the
seas. He observed, that the Athenians themselves had not received it from their
ancestors, nor been always possessed of it; that the Persian war had in a
manner forced them into the knowledge of naval affairs, notwithstanding two
great obstacles, their disposition, and the situation of their city, which
stood at a considerable distance from the sea: that they had made themselves
formidable to other nations, not so much by their real strength, as by their
courage and intrepidity: that they ought to copy them; and since they had to do
with enemies who were so enterprising, it was fit they should be equally daring.

This advice was approved, and accordingly a large fleet was equipped. Gylippus
led out all his landforces in the nightime to attack the forts of
Plemmyrium. Thirty-five galleys of Syracuse, which were in the great harbor,
and forty-five in the lesser, where was an arsenal for ships, were ordered to
advance toward Plemmyrium, to amaze the Athenians, who would find themselves
attacked both by sea and land at the same time. The Athenians at this news went
on board also, and with twentyfive ships sailed to fight the thirty-five
Syracusan vessels, which were sailing out against them from the great harbor,
and opposed thirty-five more to the forty-five of the enemy which were come out
of the little port. A sharp engagement was fought at the mouth of the great
harbor, one party endeavoring to force their way into it, and the other to
keep them out.

Those who defended the forts of Plemmyrium having flocked to the shore to view
the battle, Gylippus attacked the forts unexpectedly by daybreak; and having
carried the greatest of them by storm, the soldiers who defended the other two,
were so terrified, that they abandoned them in a moment. After this advantage
the Syracusans sustained a considerable loss, for such of their vessels as
fought at the entrance of the harbor, (after having forced the Athenians)
bulged furiously one against the other, as they entered it in disorder; and, by
this means, shifted the victory to their enemies, who were not contented with
pursuing, but also gave chase to those who were victorious in the great
harbor. Eleven Syracusan galleys were sunk, and great numbers of the sailors
in them killed. Three were taken; but the Athenians likewise lost three, and
after towing off those of the enemy, they raised a trophy in a little island
lying before Plemmyrium, and retired to the center of their camp.

One circumstance which the besieged considered of the greatest importance, was
to attempt a second engagement both by sea and land, before the fleet and other
succors sent by the Athenians should arrive. They had concerted fresh measures
for a battle at sea, by improving from the errors they had committed in the
last engagement. The change made in the galleys was, their prows were now
shorter, and, at the same time, stronger and more solid than before. For this
purpose, they fixed great pieces of timber projecting forward on each side of
the prows, and to these pieces they joined beams by way of props. The beams
extended to the length of six cubits on each side of the vessel both within and
without. By this they hoped to gain an advantage over the galleys of the
Athenians, which did not dare, because of the weakness of their prows, to
attack an enemy in front, but only in flank, not to mention, that should the
battle be fought in the harbor, they would not have room to spread themselves,
nor to pass between two galleys, in which lay their greatest art, nor to tack
about after they should have been repulsed, in order to return to the charge;
whereas, the Syracusans by their being masters of the whole extent of the
harbor, would have all these advantages, and might reciprocally assist one
another. On these circumstances the latter founded their hopes of victory.

Gylippus, therefore, first drew all the infantry out of the camp, and advanced
toward that part of the contravallation of the Athenians which faced the city,
whilst the troops of Olympia marched toward the other, and their galleys set
sail.

Nicias did not care to venture a second battle, saying, that as he expected a
fresh fleet every moment, and a great reinforcement under Demosthenes, it would
betray the greatest want of judgment, should he, as his troops were inferior in
number to those of the enemy, and already fatigued, hazard a battle without
being forced to it. On the contrary, Menander and Euthydemus, who had just
before been appointed to share the command with Nicias till the arrival of
Demosthenes, fired with ambition, and jealous of those generals, were eager to
perform some great exploit, to bereave the one of his glory, and if possible
eclipse that of the other. The pretense they alleged on this occasion was, the
fame and reputation of Athens; and they asserted with so much vehemence, that
it would be entirely destroyed should they shun the battle as the Syracusans
offered it them, that they at last forced Nicias to a compliance. The Athenians
had seventy-five galleys, and the Syracusans eighty.

The first day the fleets continued in sight of each other, in the great
harbor, without engaging, and only a few skirmishes passed, after which both
parties retired; while the landforces acted in the same manner. The Syracusans
did not make the least motion the second day. Nicias, taking advantage of this
inactivity, caused the transports to draw up in a line at some distance from
one another, in order that his galleys might retire behind them with safety, in
case he should be defeated. On the morrow the Syracusans came up sooner than
usual, when a great part of the day was spent in skirmishing, after which they
retired. The Athenians did not suppose they would return, but imagined that
fear would make them fly. But having refreshed themselves in great diligence,
and returning on board their galleys, they attacked the Athenians, who were far
from expecting them. The latter being now forced to return immediately on board
their ships, they entered them in great disorder; so that they had not time to
draw them up in a line of battle, and most of the sailors were fasting. Victory
did not long continue in suspense. The Athenians, after making a short and
slight resistance, retired behind their line of transports. The enemy pursued
them thither, but were stopped by the yards of those ships to which were fixed
dolphins of lead: these being very heavy, had they fallen on the enemy's
galleys, would have sunk them at once. The Athenians lost seven galleys in this
engagement, and a great number of soldiers were either killed or taken
prisoners.

This loss threw Nicias into the utmost consternation: all the misfortunes he
had met with ever since the time he had enjoyed the supreme command, came into
his mind, and he was now involved in a greater than any of them, by his
complying with the advice of his colleagues. Whilst he was revolving these
gloomy ideas, Demosthenes's fleet was seen coming forward in great pomp, and
with such an air as might fill the enemy with dread. It was now the day after
the battle. This fleet consisted of seventy-three galleys, on board of which
were five thousand fighting men, and about three thousand archers, slingers,
and bowmen. All these galleys were richly trimmed, their prows being adorned
with shining streamers, manned with stout rowers, commanded by good officers,
and echoing with the sound of clarions and trumpets, Demosthenes having
affected an air of pomp and triumph purposely to strike terror into the enemy.

This gallant sight alarmed them indeed beyond expression. They did not see any
end, or even the least suspension of their calamities. All they had hitherto
done or suffered was as nothing, and their work was to begin again. What hopes
could they entertain of being able to weary out the patience of the Athenians,
since, though they had a camp entrenched in the middle of Attica, were however
able to send a second army into Sicily as considerable as the former, and that
their power, as well as their courage, seemed, notwithstanding all their
losses, instead of diminishing, to increase daily.

Demosthenes having made an exact enquiry into the state of things, imagined it
would not be proper for him to lose time as Nicias had done, who having spread
an universal terror at his first arrival, becau^ afterward the object of
contempt for his having wintered in Catana, instead of going directly to
Syracuse, and had afterward given Gylippus an opportunity of throwing troops
into it. He flattered himself with the hopes that he should be able to carry
the city at the first attack, by taking advantage of the alarm which the news
of his arrival would spread in every part of it, and by that means should
immediately put an end to the war; otherwise he intended to raise the siege,
and no longer harrass and lessen the troops by fighting battles never decisive,
nor quite exhaust the city of Athens, by employing its treasures in needless
expenses.

Nicias, terrified by this bold and precipitate resolution of Demosthenes,
conjured him not to be so hasty, but to take time to weigh things deliberately,
that he might have no cause to repent of what he should do. He observed to him,
that the enemy would be ruined by delays; that their provisions as well as
money were entirely exhausted; that their allies were going to abandon them;
that they must soon be reduced to such extremity for want of provisions, as
would force them to surrender, as they had before resolved. For there were
certain persons in Syracuse who held a secret correspondence with Nicias, and
exhorted him not to be impatient, because the Syracusans were tired with the
war and with Gylippus; and that should the necessity to which they were reduced
be ever so little increased, they would surrender at discretion.

As Nicias did not explain himself clearly, and would not declare in express
terms that sure and certain advices were sent him of whatever was transacted in
the city, his remonstrances were considered as an effect of the timidity and
slowness with which he had always been reproached. Such, said they, are his
usual protractions, delays, distrusts, and fearful precaution, whereby he has
deadened all the vivacity, and extinguished all the ardour of the troops, in
not marching them immediately against the enemy; but, on the contrary, by
deferring to attack them till his own forces were weakened and despised. This
made the rest of the generals, and all the officers, come over to Demosthenes's
opinion, and Nicias himself was at last forced to acquiesce in it.

Demosthenes, after having attacked to no purpose the wall which cut the
contravallation of the besiegers, confined himself to the attack of Epipolae,
from a supposition, that should he once be master of it, the wall would be
quite undefended. He, therefore, took provisions for five days, with workmen,
implements, and every thing necessary for him to defend that post after he
should possess himself of it. As there was no going up to it in the daytime
undiscovered, he marched thither in the night with all his forces, followed by
Eurymedon and Menander; Nicias staying behind to guard the camp. They went up
by the way of Euryelus, as before, unperceived by the sentinels, attacked the
first intrenchment, and stormed it, after killing part of those who defended
it. Demosthenes, not satisfied with this advantage, to prevent the ardour of
his soldiers from cooling, and not delay the execution of his design, marches
forward. During this interval, the forces of the city, sustained by Gylippus,
marched under arms out of the intrenchments. Being seized with astonishment,
which the darkness of the night increased, they were immediately repulsed and
put to flight. But, as the Athenians advanced in disorder, to force whatever
might resist their arms, lest the enemy might rally again, should time be
allowed them to breathe and recover from their surprise, they are stopped on a
sudden by the Boeotians, who make a vigorous stand, and marching against the
Athenians with their pikes presented, they repulse them with great shouts, and
make a dreadful slaughter. This spreads an universal terror through the rest of
the army. Those who fled, either force along such as were advancing to their
assistance, or else mistaking them for enemies, turn their arms against them.
They now were all mixed indiscriminately, it being impossible to discover
objects in the horrors of a night, which was not so gloomy as entirely to make
objects imperceptible, nor yet light enough to distinguish those which were
seen. The Athenians sought for one another to no purpose, and from their often
asking the word, by which only they were able to know one another, a strange
confusion of sounds was heard, which occasion no little disorder, not to
mention that they by this means divulged the word to the enemy, and could not
learn theirs; because, by their being together, and in a body, they had no
occasion to repeat it. In the mean time, those who were pursued threw
themselves from the top of the rocks, and many were dashed to pieces by the
fall; and as most of those who escaped straggled from one another up and down
the fields and woods, they were cut to pieces the next day by the enemy's horse
who pursued them. Two thousand Athenians were slain in this engagement, and a
great number of arms were taken, those who fled having thrown them away, that
they might be the better able to escape over the precipices. Soon after
Gylippus having made the tour of Sicily, brought a great number of troops with
him, which rendered the affairs of Athens still more desperate, and deprived
Nicias of all hopes of success; besides, the Athenian army now began to
diminish exceedingly by sickness, and nothing seen to remain but their quitting
an island in which they had experienced every mortification. Nicias no longer
opposed the resolution, and only desired to have it kept secret. Orders were,
therefore, given as privately as possible, for the fleet to prepare for setting
sail with the utmost expedition.

When all things were ready, the moment they were going to set sail, (wholly
unsuspected by the enemy, who were far from surmising they would leave Sicily
so soon) the moon was suddenly eclipsed in the middle of the night, and lost
all its splendor, which terrified Nicias and the whole army, who from
ignorance and superstition, were astonished at so sudden a change, the causes
of which they did not know, and therefore dreaded the consequences of it. They
then consulted the soothsayers, who being equally unacquainted with the reasons
of this phaemonenon, only augmented their consternation. It was the custom,
after such accidents had happened, to suspend their enterprise but for three
days. The soothsayers pronounced, that he must not set sail till three times
nine days were past, (these were Thucydides' words) which doubtless was a
mysterious number in the opinion of the people. Nicias, scrupulous to a fault,
and full of a mistaken veneration for these blind interpreters of the will of
the gods, declared that he would wait a whole revolution of the moon, and not
return till the same day of the next month, as if he had not seen the planet
very clearly, the instant it had emerged from that part which was darkened by
the interposition of the earth's body.

But he was not allowed time for this. The news of the intended departure of
the Athenians soon spread over the city; a resolution was taken to attack the
besiegers both by sea and land. The Syracusans began the first day by attacking
the intrenchments, and gained a slight advantage over the enemy. On the morrow
they made a second attack, and, at the same time, sailed with seventy-six
galleys against eighty-six of the Athenian. Eumyredon, who commanded the right
of the Athenian fleet, having spread along the shore to surround them, this
movement proved fatal to him; for, as he was detached from the body of the
fleet, the Syracusans, after forcing the main battle, which was in the center,
attacked him, drove him vigorously into the gulf called Dascon, and there
defeated him entirely. Eumyredon lost his life in the engagement. They
afterward gave chase to the rest of the galleys, and run them against the
shore. Gylippus, who commanded the land army, seeing the Athenian galleys were
forced a-ground, and not able to return into the staccado, landed with part of
his troops, in order to charge the soldiers, in case they should be forced to
run ashore, and give his friends the more room to tow such galleys as they
should have taken; however, he was repulsed by the Tyrrhenians, who were posted
on that side, and obliged by the Athenians, who flew to sustain them, to retire
with some loss as far as a moor which lay near it. The latter saved most of
their ships, eighteen excepted, which were taken by the Syracusans, and their
crews cut to pieces by them. After this, resolving to burn the rest, they
filled an old vessel with combustible materials, and having set fire to it,
they drove it by the help of the wind against the Athenians, who nevertheless
extinguished the fire, and drove off that ship; each side erected trophies, the
Syracusans for the death of Eurymedon, and the advantage they had gained the
day before, and the Athenians for their having driven part of the enemy into
the moor, and put the other part to flight. But the minds of the two nations
were very differently disposed; the Syracusans, who had been thrown into the
utmost consternation at the arrival of Demosthenes with his fleet, seeing
themselves victorious in a naval engagement, resumed fresh hope, and assured
themselves of a complete victory over their enemies. The Athenians, on the
contrary, frustrated of their only resource, and overcome at sea, so contrary
to their expectations, entirely lost courage, and had no thoughts but of
retiring.

The enemy, to deprive them of all resource, and prevent their escaping, shut
the mouth of the great harbor, which was about five hundred paces wide, with
galleys placed cross-wise, and other vessels fixed with anchors and iron
chains, and, at the same time, made the requisite preparations for a battle, in
case they should have courage to engage again. When the Athenians saw
themselves thus hemmed in, the generals and principal officers assembled, in
order to deliberate on the present state of affairs. They were in absolute want
of provisions, which was owing to their having forbid the people of Catana to
bring any, from the hopes they entertained of their being able to retire, and
they could not procure any from other places unless they were masters of the
sea; this made them resolve to venture a sea fight. In this view they were
determined to leave their old camp and their walls, and to entrench themselves
on the shore near their ships, in the smallest compass possible; their design
was to leave some forces in that place to guard their baggage and the sick, and
to fight with the rest aboard all the ships they should have saved. They
intended to retire into Catana in case they should be victorious, otherwise to
set fire to their ships, and to march by land to the nearest city belonging to
their allies.

This resolution being taken, Nicias immediately filled an hundred and ten
galleys (the others having lost their oars) with the flower of his infantry,
and drew up the rest of the forces, particularly the bowmen, in order of battle
on the shore. As the Athenians dreaded very much the beaks of the Syracusan
galleys, Nicias had provided harping-irons to grapple them, in order to break
the force of the blow, and to come immediately to close fight as on shore. But
the enemy perceiving this, covered the prows and upper part of their galleys
with leather, to prevent their being so easily laid hold of. The commanders on
both sides had employed all their rhetoric to animate their men, and none could
ever have been prompted with stronger motives, for the battle which was going
to be fought was to determine not only their lives and liberties, but also the
fate of their country.

This battle was very obstinate and bloody. The Athenians being arrived at the
mouth of the port, easily took those ships which defended the entrance of it,
but when they attempted to break the chain of the rest to widen the passage,
the enemy came up from all quarters. As near two hundred galleys came rushing
on each side in a narrow place, there must necessarily be a very great
confusion, and the vessels could not easily advance forward, or retire, or turn
about to renew the attack. The beaks of the galleys for this reason did very
little execution, but there were very furious and frequent discharges. The
Athenians were overwhelmed with a shower of stones, which always did execution
from what place soever they were thrown, whereas they defended themselves by
only shooting darts and arrows, which by the motion of the ships, from the
agitation of the sea, did not carry true, and by that means the greatest part
of them did little execution. Ariston, the pilot, had given the Syracusans this
counsel. These discharges being over, the soldiers heavily armed attempted to
enter the enemies ships, in order to fight hand to hand, and it often happened
that whilst they were climbing up one side, their own ships were entered on the
other, and two or three ships were grappled to one, which occasioned a great
perplexity and confusion. Farther, the noise of the ships that dashed one
against the other, the different cries of the victors and vanquished, prevented
the orders of the officers from being heard. The Athenians wanted to force a
passage, whatever might be the consequence, to secure their return into their
own country, and this the enemy employed their utmost efforts to prevent, in
order that they might gain a more complete and more glorious victory. The two
land-armies, which were drawn up on the highest part of the shore, and the
inhabitants of the city who were there, ^an to the walls, whilst the rest
kneeling in ^he temples were imploring heaven to give success to their
fellow-citizens, all these saw clear, because of their little distance from the
fleets every thing that passed, and contemplated the battle as from an
amphitheatre, but not without great anxiety and terror. Attentive to, and
shuddering at every movement, and the several changes which happened, they
discovered the concern they had in the battle, their fears, their hopes, their
grief, their joy, by different cries and different gestures, stretching out
their hands sometimes toward the combatants to animate them, at other times
toward heaven, to implore the succor and protection of the gods. At last the
Athenian fleet, after sustaining a long battle, and a vigorous resistance, was
put to flight, and drove against the shore. The Syracusans, who were spectators
of this victory, conveyed the news to the whole city by an universal shout. The
victors, now masters of the sea, and sailing with a favorable wind toward
Syracuse, erected a trophy, whilst the Athenians, who were quite dejected and
overpowered, did not so much as request that their dead soldiers might be
delivered to them, in order to pay the last sad duty to their remains.

There now remained but two methods for them to choose, either to attempt the
passage a second time, for which they had ships and soldiers sufficient, or to
abandon their fleet to the enemy and retire by land. Demosthenes proposed the
former, but the sailors, in the deepest affliction, refused to obey, fully
persuaded that it would be impossible for them to sustain a second engagement.
The second method was, therefore, resolved upon, and accordingly they prepared
to set out in the night, to conceal the march of their army from the enemy.

But Hermocrates, who suspected their design, was very sensible that it was of
the utmost importance not to suffer so great a body of forces to escape, since
they otherwise might sortify themselves in some corner of the island, and renew
the war. The Syracusans were at that time in the midst of their festivity and
rejoicings, and meditating nothing but how they might divert themselves after
the toils they had sustained in fight. They were then solemnizing the festival
of Hercules. To desire the Syracusans to take up arms again in order to pursue
the enemy, and to attempt to draw them from their diversions, either by force
or persuasion, would have been to no purpose, for which reason, another
expedient was employed. Hermocrates sent out a few horsemen, who were to pass
for friends of the Athenians, and ordered them to cry aloud, Tell Nicias not to
retire till day light, for the Syracusans lie in ambush for him, and have
seized on their passes. This false advice stopped Nicias at once, and he did
not even set out the next day, in order that the soldiers might have more time
to prepare for their departure, and carry off whatever might be necessary for
their subsistence, and abandon the rest.

The enemy had time enough for seizing the avenues. The next morning early they
possessed themselves of the most difficult passes, fortified those places where
the rivers were fordable, broke down the bridges, and spread detachments of
horse up and down the plain, so that there was not one place which the
Athenians could pass without fighting. They set out upon their march the third
day after the battle, with design to retire to Catana. The whole army was in an
inexpressible consternation, to see such a great number of men either dead, or
dying, some of whom were left exposed to wild beasts, and the rest to the
cruelty of the enemy. Those who were sick and wounded conjured them with tears,
to take them along with the army, and held by their clothes when they were
going, or else crawling after them, followed them as far as their strength
would permit; and, when this failed, had recourse to tears, sighs,
imprecations, and sending up toward heaven plaintive and dying groans; they
called upon the gods, as well as men, to avenge their cruelty, whilst every
place echoed with lamentations.

The whole army was in a deplorable condition. All the Athenians were seized
with the deepest melancholy. They were inwardly tortured with rage and anguish,
when they represented to themselves the greatness from which they were fallen,
the extreme misery to which they were reduced, and the still greater evils from
which they foresaw it would be impossible for them to escape. They could not
bear the comparison for ever present in their thoughts, of the triumphant state
in which they had left Athens, in the midst of the good wishes and acclamations
of the people, with the ignominy of their retreat, aggravated by the cries and
imprecations of their relations and fellow-citizens.

But the most melancholy part of the spectacle, and that which most deserved
compassion, was Nicias, dejected and worn out by a tedious illness, deprived of
the most necessary stores at a time when his age and infirmities required them
most, pierced not only with his private grief, but with that of others, all
which preyed upon his heart. However, this great man, superior to all his
evils, thought of nothing but how he might best comfort his soldiers, and
revive their courage. He ran up and down in all places, crying aloud, that
their situation was not yet desperate, and that other armies had escaped from
greater dangers; that they ought not to accuse themselves, or grieve too
immoderately for misfortunes which they had not occasioned; that if they had
offended some god, his vengeance must be satiated by this time; that fortune,
after having so long favored the enemy, would at last be tired of persecuting
them; that their bravery and their numbers made them still formidable, (being
still near forty thousand strong) that no city in Sicily would be able to
withstand them, nor prevent their settling wherever they might think proper;
that they had no more to do but to take care severally of themselves, and march
in good order; that by a prudent and courageous retreat, which was now become
their only resource, they would not only save themselves, but also their
country, and enable it to recover its former grandeur.

The army marched in two bodies, both drawn up in the form of a phalanx, the
first being commanded by Nicias, and the second by Demosthenes, with the
baggage in the center. Being come to the river Anapis, they forced their
passage, and afterward were charged by all the enemy's cavalry, as well as
archers, who discharged perpetually upon them. They were annoyed in this manner
during several days march, every one of the passes being guarded, and the
Athenians being obliged to dispute every inch of their way. The enemy did not
care to hazard a battle against an army which despair alone might render
invincible; and the instant the Athenians presented the Syracusans battle, the
latter retired; but whenever the former proceeded in their march, they advanced
and charged them in their retreat.

Demosthenes and Nicias seeing the miserable condition to which the troops were
reduced, being in extreme want of provisions, and great numbers of them
wounded, judged it advisable to retire toward the sea by a quite contrary way
from that in which they then marched, and to make directly for Camarina and
Gela, instead of proceeding to Catana as they first intended. They set out in
the night after lighting a great number of fires. The retreat was made in great
confusion and disorder, as generally happens to great armies in the gloomy
horrors of the night, especially when the enemy is not far off. However, the
vanguard commanded by Nicias, went forward in good order, but above half the
rear-guard, with Demosthenes at their head, quitted from the main body, and
lost their way. On the next day the Syracusans, who on the report of their
retreat, had marched with the utmost diligence, came up with him about noon,
and having surrounded him with their horse, drove him into a narrow place
enclosed with a wall, where his soldiers fought like lions. Perceiving at the
close of the day that they were oppressed with fatigue, and covered with
wounds, the conquering Syracusans gave the islanders leave to retire, which
some of them accepted, and they afterward spared the lives of the rest who
surrendered at discretion, with Demosthenes, after having stipulated that they
should not be put to death, nor sentenced to perpetual imprisonment. About six
thousand soldiers surrendered on these conditions.

Nicias arrived the same evening at the river Erineus, and passing it, encamped
on a mountain, where the enemy came up with him the next day, and summoned him
to surrender at discretion as Demosthenes had done. Nicias could not persuade
himself at first that what they told him concerning Demosthenes was true; and,
therefore, desired leave to send some horse for information. Upon their
returning with the news that Demosthenes had really surrendered in that manner,
Nicias offered to pay the expenses of the war, upon condition they would permit
him to leave the country with his forces, and to give as many Athenians for
hostages as they should be obliged to pay talents. But the enemy rejected this
proposal with disdain and insolence, and renewed the attack. Nicias, though in
absolute want of all things, however sustained the charge the whole night, and
marched toward the river Asinarus. When they were got to the banks of it, the
Syracusans advancing up to them, threw most of them into the stream, the rest
already having plunged voluntarily into it to quench their thirst. Here the
greatest and most bloody havoc was made, the poor wretches being butchered
without the least pity as they were drinking. Nicias finding all lost, and
unable to bear this dismal spectacle, surrendered at discretion, upon condition
that Gylippus should discontinue the fight, and spare the rest of his army. A
great number were killed, and more taken prisoners, so that all Sicily was
filled with them. The Athenians seemed to have been displeased with their
general for surrendering in this manner at discretion; and, for this reason,
his name was omitted in a public monument, on which was engraved the names of
those commanders who had lost their lives in fighting for their country.

The victors, adorned with the arms taken from the prisoners, the finest and
largest trees they could find on the banks of the rivers, and made a kind of
trophies of those trees, when crowning themselves with chaplets of flowers,
dressing their horses in the richest caparisons, and cropping those of their
enemies, they entered triumphantly into Syracuse, after having happily
terminated the most considerable war in which they had ever been engaged with
the Greeks, and won by their strength and valor a most signal and most
complete victory.

The next day a council was held to deliberate on what was to be done with the
prisoners. Diocles, one of the leaders of greatest authority among the people,
proposed that all the Athenians who were born of free parents, and all such
Sicilians as had joined with them, should be imprisoned, and only two measures
of flour and one of water given them daily; that the slaves and all the allies
should be publicly sold, and that the two Athenian generals should be first
scourged with rods, and afterward put to death.

This last article was exceedingly disliked by all wise and compassionate
Syracusans. Hermocrates, who was very famous for his probity and justice,
attempted to make some remonstrances to the people, but they would not hear
him, and the shouts which echoed on all sides prevented him from continuing his
speech. At that instant an ancient man, venerable for his great age and
gravity, who in this war had lost two sons, the only heirs to his name and
estate, made his servants carry him to the tribunal for harrangues, and the
instant he appeared a profound silence was made. "You here behold, says he, an
unfortunate father who has felt more than any other Syracusan the fatal effects
of this war, by the death of two sons who formed all the consolation, and were
the only supports of my old age. I cannot, indeed, forbear admiring their
courage and felicity, in sacrificing to their country's welfare a life of which
they would one day have been deprived by the common course of nature: but then
I cannot but be strongly affected with the cruel wound which their death has
made in my heart, nor forbear hating and detesting the Athenians, the authors
of this unhappy war, as the murderers of my children; but, however, I cannot
conceal one circumstance, which is, that I am less sensible of my private
affliction than of the honor of my country, and I see it exposed to eternal
infamy by the barbarous advice which is now given you. The Athenians indeed
merit the worst treatment, and every kind of punishment that can be inflicted
on them for so unjustly declaring war against us, but have not the gods, the
just avengers of crimes, punished them, and revenged us sufficiently. When
their general laid down his arms and surrendered, did he not do this in the
hopes of having their lives spared, and if we put them to death, will it be
possible for us to avoid the just reproach of our having violated the laws of
nations, and dishonored our victory by an unheard of cruelty? How will you
suffer your glory to be thus sullied in the face of the whole world, and have
it said, that a nation who first dedicated a temple in this city to Clemency
had not found any in yours? Surely victories and triumphs do not give immortal
glory to a city; but the exercising mercy toward a vanquished enemy, the using
moderation in the greatest prosperity, and fearing to offend the gods by a
haughty and insolent pride, will ever insure it. You doubtless have not forgot
that this Nicias, whose fate you are going to pronounce, was the very man who
pleaded your cause in the assembly of the Athenians, and employed all his
credit, and the whole power of his eloquence to dissuade his country from
embarking in this war; should you, therefore, pronounce sentence of death on
this worthy general, would it be a just reward for the zeal he showed for your
interest? With regard to myself, death would be less grievous to me than the
sight of so horrid an injustice committed by my countrymen and fellow-citizens."

The people seemed moved with compassion at this speech, especially when this
venerable old man first ascended, they expected to hear him cry aloud for
vengeance on those who had brought all his calamities upon him, instead of
suing for their pardon. But the enemies of the Athenians having expatiated with
vehemence on the unheard of cruelties which their republic had exercised on
several cities belonging to their enemies, and even to their ancient allies;
the inveteracy which the commanders had shown against Syracuse, and the evils
they would have made it suffer had they been victorious, the afflictions and
groans of infinite numbers of Syracusans who bewailed the death of their
children and near relations, whose manes could be appeased no other way than by
the blood of their murderers. These representations prevailed, and the people
returned to their sanguinary resolution, and followed Diocles's advice in every
respect. Gylippus used his utmost endeavors, but in vain, to have Nicias and
Demosthenes given up to him, (especially as he had taken them) in order for him
to carry them to Lacedaemon; but his demand was rejected with a haughty scorn,
and the two generals were put to death.

All wise and compassionate men could not forbear shedding tears at the
tragical fate of two such illustrious personages, and particularly for Nicias,
who, of all men of his time, seemed least to merit so ignominious and untimely
an end. When people recollect the speeches and remonstrances he had made to
prevent this war; and, on the other side, when they considered how high a
regard he had always retained for things relating to religion, the greatest
part of them were tempted to exclaim against providence, in seeing that a man,
who had ever shown the highest reverence for the gods, and had always exerted
himself to the utmost for their honor and worship, should be so ill rewarded
by them, and meet with no better fate than the most abandoned wretches.

The prisoners were shut up in the prisons of Syracuse, where, crowded one upon
the other, they suffered incredible torment for eight months. Here they were
for ever exposed to the inclemencies of the weather, scorched in the daytime
by the burning rays of the sun, or frozen in the night by the colds of autumn;
poisoned by the stench of their own excrement, by the carcasses of those who
died of their wounds and of sickness, and worn out by hunger and thirst, for
the daily allowance to each was but a small measure of water and two of meal.
Those who were taken out of this place two months after, in order to be sold as
slaves, many of whom were citizens who had concealed their condition, found a
less rigorous fate. Their wisdom, their patience, and a certain air of probity
and modesty were of great advantage to them, for they were soon restored to
their liberty, or met with the kindest and most generous treatment from their
masters. Several of them even owed the good usage they met with to Eurypides,
the finest scenes of whose tragedies they repeated to the Sicilians, who were
extremely fond of them; so that when they returned to their own country, they
went and saluted that poet as their deliverer, and informed him of the
admirable effects wrought in their favor by his verses.

The news of the defeat being carried to Athens, the citizens would not believe
it at first, and were so far from giving credit to the report, that they
sentenced that man to death who first published the tidings; but when it was
confirmed, all the Athenians were seized with the utmost consternation; and, as
if themselves had not decreed the war, they vented their rage and resentment
against the orators who had promoted the enterprise, as well as against the
soothsayers, who by their supposed prodigies, had flattered them with the hopes
of success. They had never been reduced to so deplorable a condition as now,
having neither horse, foot, money, galleys, nor mariners; in a word, they were
in the deepest despair, expecting every moment that the enemy, elate with so
great a victory, and strengthened by the revolt of the allies, would come and
invade Athens both by sea and land with all the forces of Peloponnesus. Cicero
had reason to observe, speaking of the battles in the harbor of Syracuse, that
it was there the troops of Athens, as well as their galleys, were ruined and
sunk, and that in this harbor the power and glory of the Athenians were
miserably shipwrecked.

The Athenians, however, did not suffer themselves to be wholly dejected, but
resumed courage. They now resolved to raise money on all sides, and to import
timber for building ships, in order to awe the allies, and particularly the
inhabitants of the island of Euboea. They retrenched all superfluous expenses,
and established a new council of ancient men who were to weigh and examine all
affairs before they should be proposed to the people. In fine, they omitted
nothing which might be of service in the present conjuncture, the alarm in
which they were in, and their common danger, obliging every individual to be
attentive to the necessities of the state, and sedulous to all advice that
might promote its interests.

Such was the event of the siege of Syracuse, the failure of which destroyed
the power of those that had undertaken it. We have hitherto seen Athens rising
in arts and arms, giving lessons both in politeness, humanity, philosophy, and
war, to all the nations round, and beginning to fix an empire, which, if once
established, no neighboring power could overthrow. But their ambition grew
faster than their abilities, and their views extending beyond their capacity to
execute, they fell at once from that height to which for ages they had been
assiduously aspiring. We are now, therefore, to be presented with a different
picture, we are no longer to view this little state panting for conquests over
other nations, but timorously defending itself at home; we are no longer to
view Athens taking the lead in the councils, and conducting the confederated
armies of Greece; they now become in a measure annihilated, they fade from the
eye of the historian; and other nations, whose names have hitherto been
scarcely mentioned, emerge from obscurity. The rashness of this enterprise was
severely punished in the loss of their best generals, fleets, and armies; all
now was destroyed, or left at the mercy of those whom they had so unseasonably
undertaken to subdue.

Their allies began now to think of throwing off their yoke; and even those who
had stood neuter took this occasion to declare against them. But the
Lacedaemonians being more particularly elevated, resolved to prosecute the war
with vigor, and the winter was spent in preparations on both sides. The
Athenians, in their present distress, scarce knew where to turn; many of their
allied cities revolted, and it was with the utmost difficulty, that by placing
their forces and fleets at Samos, they reduced such states as had abandoned
them to their former obedience, and kept the rest in their duty: thus still
struggling with a part of their former spirit, they kept themselves in a
condition to make head against their enemies, over whom they had obtained
several advantages.

Alcibiades, who was well informed of all that passed among the Athenians, sent
secretly to the principal of them at Samos to sound their sentiments, and to
let them know that he was not averse to returning to Athens, provided the
administration of the republic were put into the hands of the great and
powerful, and not left to the populace, who had expelled him. Some of the
principal officers went from Samos with a design to concert with him the proper
measures for the success of that undertaking. He promised to procure the
Athenians not only the favor of the king of Persia, with whom he had taken
refuge, but of the king himself, upon condition they would abolish the
democracy, or popular government; because the king would place more confidence
in the engagements of the nobility than upon those of the inconstant and
capricious multitude. The chief man who opposed his return was Phrynicus, one
of the generals, who, to compass his designs, sent word to Astyochus, the
Lacedaemomian general, that Alcibiades was treating with ^issaphernes, to bring
him over to the Athenian interest. He offered farther, to betray to him the
whole army and navy of the Athenians. But his treasonable practices being all
detected by the good understanding betwixt Alcibiades and Astyochus, he was
laid aside, and afterward stabbed in the marketplace.

In the mean time, the Athenians went eagerly forward to complete that change
of government which had been proposed to them by Alcibiades; the democracy
began to be abolished in several cities of Athens, and soon after the scheme
was carried boldly forward by Pysander, who was chiefly concerned in this
transaction. To give a new form to this government, he caused ten commissaries,
with absolute power, to be appointed, who were, however, at a certain fixed
time, to give the people an account of what they had done. At the expiration of
that term, the general assembly was summoned, wherein their first resolution
was, that every one should be admitted to make such proposals as he thought
fit, without being liable to any accusation for infringing the law, or
consequential penalty. It was afterward decreed, that a new council should be
formed, with full power to administer the public affairs, and to elect new
magistrates. For this purpose, five presidents were established, who nominated
one hundred persons, including themselves. Each of these chose and associated
three more at his own pleasure, which made in all four hundred, in whom an
absolute power was lodged. But to amuse the people, and to console them with a
shadow of popular government, whilst they instituted a real oligarchy, it was
said that the four hundred should call a council of five thousand citizens to
assist them when they should judge it necessary. The council and assemblies of
the people were held as usual, nothing was done, however, but by order of the
four hundred. The people of Athens were deprived in this manner of their
liberty, which they had enjoyed almost an hundred years, after having abolished
the tyranny of the Pisistratides.

This decree being passed without opposition, after the separation of the
assembly the four hundred, armed with daggers, and attended by an hundred and
twenty young men, whom they made use of when any execution required it, entered
the senate, and compelled the senators to retire, after having paid them the
arrears due upon their appointments. They elected new magistrates out of their
own body, observing the usual ceremonies upon such occasions. They did not
think proper to recall those who were banished, lest they should authorize the
return of Alcibiades, whose uncontrollable spirit they apprehended, and who
would soon have made himself master of the people. Abusing their power in a
tyrannical manner, they put some to death, others they banished, and
confiscated their estates with impunity. All who ventured to oppose this
change, or even to complain of it, were butchered upon false pretexts, and
those were intimidated who demanded justice of the murderers. The four hundred,
soon after their establishment, sent ten deputies to Samos for the army's
concurrence to their establishment.

The army, in the mean time, which was at Samos, protested against those
proceedings in the city; and, at the persuasion of Thrasybulus, recalled
Alcibiades, and created him general, with full power to sail directly to the
Pyraeus and crush this new tyranny. Alcibiades, however, would not give way to
this rash opinion, but went first to show himself to Tissaphernes, and let him
know, that it was now in his power to treat him as a friend or an enemy. By
which means he awed the Athenians with Tissaphernes, and Tissaphernes with the
Athenians. When, afterward, the four hundred sent to Samos to vindicate their
proceedings, the army was for putting the messengers to death, and persisted in
the design upon the Pyraeus, but Alcibiades, by opposing it, manifestly saved
the commonwealth.

In the mean while, the innovation in Athens had occasioned such factions and
tumults, that the four hundred were more intent upon providing for their safety
than prosecuting the war. In order to which, they fortisied that part of the
Pyraeus which commands the mouth of the haven, and resolved, in case of
extremity, rather to let in the Lacedaemonians than expose their persons to the
fury of their fellow-citizens. The Spartans took occasion from these
disturbances, to hover about with forty-two galleys under the conduct of
Hegesandrides; and the Athenians, with thirty-six under Timochares, were forced
to engage them, but lost part of their fleet, and the rest were dispersed. To
add to which, all Euboea, except Oreus, revolted to the Peloponnesians.

This failure of success served to give the finishing blow to the power of the
four hundred. The Athenians without delay deposed them as the authors of all
their troubles and divisions under which they groaned. Alcibiades was recalled
by unanimous consent, and earnestly solicited to make all possible haste to
the assistance of the city. But judging that if he returned immediately to
Athens, he should owe his recall to the compassion and favor of the people, he
resolved to render his return glorious and triumphant, and to deserve it by
some considerable exploit. For this purpose, leaving Samos with a small number
of ships, he cruised about the island of Cos and Cnidos, and having learnt that
Mindarus, the Spartan admiral, was sailed to the Hellespont with his whole
fleet, and that the Athenians were in pursuit of him, he steered that way with
the utmost diligence to support them, and arrived happily with his eighteen
vessels at the time the fleets were engaged near Abydos, in a battle which
lasted till night, without any advantage on either side. His arrival gave the
Spartans new courage at first, who believed him still their friend, and
dispirited the Athenians. But Alcibiades hanging out the Athenian flag in the
admiral's galley, fell upon them and put them to flight; and animated by his
success, sunk their vessels, and made a great slaughter of their soldiers who
had thrown themselves into the sea to save themselves by swimming. The
Athenians, after having taken thirty of their galleys, and retaken those they
had lost, erected a trophy.

Alcibiades after this victory went to visit Tissaphernes, who was so far from
receiving him as he expected, that he immediately caused him to be seized, and
sent away prisoner to Sardis, telling him he had orders from the king to make
war upon the Athenians; but the truth is, he was afraid of being accused to his
master by the Peloponnesians, and thought, by this act of injustice, to purge
himself from all former imputations. Alcibiades, after thirty days, made his
escape to Clazomenae, and soon after bore down upon the Peloponnesian fleet,
which rode at anchor before the port of Cyzicus. With twenty of his best ships
he broke through the enemy, pursued those who abandoned their ships and fled to
land, and made a great slaughter. The Athenians took all the enemies ships,
made themselves masters of Cyzicus, while Mingimis, the Lacedaemonian general,
was found among the number of the slain.

Alcibiades well knew how to make use of the victory he had gained; and, at the
head of his conquering forces, took several cities which had revolted from the
Athenians. Calcedon, Salymbria, and Byzantium, were among the number. Thus
slushed with conquest, he seemed to desire nothing so ardently as to be once
more seen by his countrymen, as his presence would be a triumph to his friends,
and an insult to his enemies. Accordingly, being recalled, he set sail for
Athens. Besides the ships covered with bucklers and spoils of all sorts in the
manner of trophies, a great number of vessels also were towed after him by way
of triumph; he displayed also the ensigns and ornaments of those he had burnt,
which were more than the others, the whole amounting to about two hundred
ships. It is said, that reflecting on what had been done against him, upon
approaching the port, he was struck with some terror, and was afraid to quit
his vessel till he saw from the deck a great number of his friends and
relations who were come to the shore to receive him, and earnestly entreated
him to land. As soon as he was landed, the multitude who came out to meet him,
fixed their eyes on him, thronged about him, saluted him with loud
acclamations, and crowned him with garlands; he received their congratulations
with great satisfaction; he desired to be discharged from his former
condemnation, and obtained from the priests an absolution from all their former
denunciations.

Yet, notwithstanding these triumphs, the real power of Athens was now no more,
the strength of the state was gone, and even the passion for liberty was lost
in the common degeneracy of the times; many of the meaner sort of people
passionately desired that Alcibiades would take the sovereignty upon him, they
even desired him to set himself above the reach of envy, by securing all power
in his own person; the great, however, were not so sanguine in their gratitude,
they were content with appointing him generalissimo of all their forces; they
granted him whatever he demanded, and gave him for colleagues the generals most
agreeable to him. He set sail accordingly, with an hundred ships, and steered
for the island of Andros that had revolted, where, having defeated the
inhabitants, he went from thence to Samos, intending to make that the seat of
the war. In the mean time, the Lacedaemonians, justly alarmed at his success,
made choice of a general supposed to be capable of making head against him; for
this reason, they fixed upon Lysander, who, though born of the highest family,
had been bred up to hardships, and paid an entire respect to the discipline and
manners of his country. He was brave and aspiring, and, like his countrymen,
sacrificed all sorts of pleasure to his ambition. He had an evenness and
sedateness of temper which made all conditions of life sit easy upon him, but
withal was extremely insinuating, crafty, and designing, and made his interest
the only measure of truth and falsehood. This deceitful temper was observed to
run through the whole course of his life; upon which occasion it was said, that
he cheated children with foul play, and men with perjury: and it was a maxim of
his own, that when the lion fails we must make use of the fox.

Lysander having brought his army to Ephesus, gave orders for assembling ships
of burden from all parts, and erected an arsenal for building of galleys; he
made the ports free for merchants, gave the public places to artificers, put
all arts in motion, and, by these means, filled the city with riches, and laid
the foundation of that magnificence which he afterward obtained. Whilst he was
making these dispositions, he received advice that Cyrus, the Persian prince,
was arrived at Sardis, he, therefore, set out from Ephesus to make him a visit,
and to complain of Tissaphernes, whose duplicity and treachery had been fatal
to their common cause. Cyrus, who had a personal enmity to that general, came
into the views of Lysander, agreed to increase the seamens pay, and to give him
all the assistance in his power.

This largess filled the whole fleet with ardour and alacrity, and almost
unmanned the enemies galleys, the greatest part of the mariners deserting to
the party where the pay was best. The Athenians, in despair, upon receiving
this news, endeavored to conciliate Cyrus by the interposition of
Tissaphernes, but he would not hearken to them, notwithstanding the satrap
represented, that it was not for the king's interest to aggrandize the
Lacedaemonians, but to balance the power of one side with that of the other, in
order to perpetuate the war, and to ruin both by their own divsions.

Alcibiades, on the other hand, having occasion to leave the fleet, in order to
raise the supplies, gave the command of his fleet to Antiochus, with express
command not to engage or attack the enemy in his absence. Antiochus, however,
was willing to do some action that might procure him favor without a partner
in the glory; he was so far, therefore, from observing the orders that were
given him, that he presently sailed away for Ephesus; and, at the very mouth of
the harbor, used every art to provoke the enemy to an engagement. Lysander at
first manned out a few ships to repel his insults; but as the Athenian ships
advanced to support Antiochus, other galleys belonging to the Lacedaemonians
also came on, till both fleets arrived by little and little, and the engagement
became general on both sides. Lysander at length was victorious; Antiochus was
slain, and fifteen Athenian galleys were taken. It was in vain that Alcibiades
soon after came up to the relief of his friends; it was in vain that he offered
to renew the combat, Lysander, content with the victory he had gained, was
unwilling again to trust to fortune.

The fickle multitude of Athens again, therefore, began to accuse Alcibiades of
insufficiency. He who was just before respected even to adoration, was now
discarded upon a groundless suspicion, that he had not done his duty. But it
was the glory he had obtained by his past services that now ruined him; for his
continual success had begot in the people such an opinion of him, that they
thought it impossible for him to fail in any thing he undertook, and from
thence his enemies took occasion to question his integrity, and to impute to
him both his own and other miscarriages. Callicratidas was appointed to succeed
Lysander, whose year was expired; alike severe to himself and others,
inaccessible to flattery and sloth, the declared enemy of luxury, he retained
the modesty, temperance, and austerity of the ancient Spartans, virtues that
began to distinguish him particularly, as they were not too common in his time.
His probity and justice were proof against all things; his simplicity and
integrity abhorred all falsehood and fraud, to which were joined a truly Spartan
nobleness and grandeur of soul. The first attempt of the new admiral was
against Methymna, in Lesbos, which he took by storm. He then threatened Conon,
who was appointed general of the Athenians, that he would make him leave
debauching the sea, and accordingly soon after pursued him into the port of
Mytilene with an hundred and seventy sail, took thirty of his ships, and
besieged him in the town, from which he cut off all provisions. He soon after
took ten ships more out of twelve which were coming to his relief. Then hearing
that the Athenians had fitted out their whole strength, consisting of an
hundred and fifty sail; he left fifty of his ships, under Etonicus to carry on
the siege of Mytilene, and with an hundred and twenty more met the Athenians at
Arginusae, over against Lesbos. His pilot advised him to retreat, for that the
enemy was superior in number. He told him that Sparta would be never the worse
inhabited though he were slain. The fight was long and obstinate, until at last
the ships of Callicratidas chargng through the enemy was sunk, and the rest
fled. The Peloponnesians lost about seventy sail, and the Athenians
twenty-five, with most of the men in them. The Athenian admirals, who had the
joint command of the sleet, instead of being rewarded for so signal a victory,
were made a barbarous instance of the power and ingratitude of their
fellow-citizens. Upon a relation of the fight before the senate, it was
alleged, they had suffered their men who were shipwrecked to be lost when they
might have saved them; upon which, they were clapped in irons in order to
answer it to the people. They urged in their defense, that they were pursuing
the enemy; and, at the same time, gave orders about taking up the men to those
whose business it more peculiarly was, particularly to Theramenes, who was now
their accuser; but yet, that their orders could not be executed by reason of a
violent storm which happened at that time. This seemed so reasonable and
satisfactory, that several stood up and offered to bail them: but, in another
assembly, the popular incendiaries demanded justice, and so awed the judges,
that Socrates was the only man who had courage enough to declare, he would do
nothing contrary to law, and accordingly refused to act. After a long debate,
eight of the ten were condemned, and six of them were put to death, among whom
was Pericles, son of the great Pericles. He declared, that they had failed in
nothing of their duty, as they had given orders that the dead bodies should be
taken up; that if any one were guilty, it was he, who being charged with these
orders, had neglected to put them in execution, but that he accused nobody, and
that the tempest which came on unexpectedly, at the very instant, was an
unanswerable apology, and entirely discharged the accused from all guilt. He
demanded that a whole day should be allowed them to make their defense, a
favor not denied to the most criminal, and that they should be tried
separately. He represented, that they were not in the least obliged to
precipitate a sentence wherein the lives of the most Illustrious of the
citizens were concerned; that it was in some measure attacking the gods, to
make men responsible for the winds and weather; that they could not without the
most flagrant ingratitude and injustice put the conquerors to death, to whom
they ought to decree crowns and honors, or give up the defenders of their
country to the rage of those who envied them; that if they did so, their unjust
judgment would be followed by a sudden, but vain repentance, which would leave
behind it the sharpest remorse, and cover them with eternal shame and infamy;
among the number also was Diomedon, a person equally eminent for his valor and
his probity, as he was carrying to execution, he demanded to be heard.
"Athenians, said he, I wish the sentence you have passed upon us may not prove
the misfortune of the republic; but I have one favor to ask of you in behalf
of my colleagues and myself, which is to acquit us before the gods of the vows
we made to them for you and ourselves, as we are not in a condition to
discharge them, for it is to their protection invoked before the battle, we
acknowledge that we are indebted for the victory gained by us over the enemy."
There was not a good citizen that did not melt into tears at this discourse, so
full of goodness and religion, and admire with surprise the moderation of a
person, who seeing himself unjustly condemned, did not however vent the least
resentment, or even complaint against his judges, but was solely intent (in
favor of an ungrateful country which had doomed them to perish) upon what it
owed to the gods in common with them for the victory they had lately obtained.

This complication of injustice and ingratitude seemed to give the finishing
blow to the affairs of the Athenian state; they struggled for a while after
their defeat at Syracuse, but from hence they were entirely sunk, though
seemingly in the arms of victory.

The enemy after their last defeat had once more recourse to Lysander, who had
so often led them to conquest; on him they placed their chief confidence, and
ardently solicited his return. The Lacedaemonians, to gratify their allies, and
yet to observe their laws, which forbad that honor being conferred twice on
the same person, sent him with an inferior title, but with the power of
admiral. Thus appointed, Lysander sailed toward the Hellespont, and laid siege
to Lampsacus; the place was carried by storm, and abandoned by Lysander to the
mercy of the soldiers. The Athenians, who followed him close, upon the news of
his success steered forward toward Olestus, and from thence sailing along the
coast, halted over against the enemy at Aegos Potamos, a place fatal for the
Athenians.

The Hellespont is not above two thousand paces broad in that place. The two
armies seeing themselves so near each other, expected only to rest that day,
and were in hopes of coming to a battle on the next. But Lysander had another
design in view; he commanded the seamen and pilots to go on board their
galleys, as if they were in reality to fight the next morning at break of day,
to hold themselves in readiness, and to wait his orders in profound silence. He
ordered the land army in like manner to draw up in battle upon the coast, and
to wait the day without any noise. On the morning as soon as the sun was risen,
the Athenians began to row toward them with their whole fleet in one line, and
to bid them defiance. Lysander, though his ships were ranged in order of
battle, with their heads toward the enemy, lay still without making any
movement. In the evening when the Athenians withdrew, he did not suffer his
soldiers to go ashore till two or three galleys which he had sent out to
observe them, were returned with advice, that they had seen the enemy land. The
next day passed in the same manner, as did the third and fourth. Such a
conduct, which argued reserve and apprehension, extremely augmented the
security and boldness of the Athenians, and inspired them with an high contempt
for an army, which fear prevented from showing themselves or attempting any
thing.

Whilst this passed, Alcibiades, who was near the fleet, took horse and came to
the Athenian generals, to whom he represented, that they kept upon a very
disadvantageous coast, where there were neither ports nor cities in the
neighborhood; that they were obliged to bring their provisions from Sestos,
with great danger and difficulty, and that they were very much in the wrong to
suffer the soldiers and mariners of the fleet, as soon as they were ashore to
straggle and disperse themselves at their pleasure, whilst the enemy's fleet
faced them in view, accustomed to execute the orders of their general with
instant obedience, and upon the slightest signal. He offered also to attack the
enemy by land with a strong body of Thracian troops and to force them to a
battle. The generals, especially Tydeus and Menander, jealous of their command,
did not content themselves with refusing his offers, from the opinion, that if
the event proved unfortunate, the whole blame would fall upon them, and if
favorable, that Alcibiades would engross the honor of it, but rejected also
with insult his wise and salutary counsel, as if a man in disgrace lost his
sense and abilities with the favor of the commonwealth. Alcibiades withdrew.

The fifth day the Athenians presented themselves again, and offered him
battle, retiring in the evening according to custom with more insulting airs
than the days before. Lysander, as usual, detached some galleys to observe
them, with orders to return with the utmost diligence when they saw the
Athenians landed, and to put a brown buckler at each ship's head as soon as
they reached the middle of the channel. Himself, in the mean time, ran through
the whole line in his galley, exhorting the pilots and officers to hold the
seamen and soldiers in readiness to row and fight on the first signal.

As soon as the bucklers were put up in the ship's heads, and the admiral's
galley had given the signal by the sound of trumpet, the whole fleet set
forwards in good order. The land army, at the same time, made all possible
haste to the top of the promontory to see the battle. The straight that
separates the two continents in this place is about fifteen stadia, or three
quarters of a league in breadth, which space was presently cleared through the
activity and diligence of the rowers. Conon, the Athenian general, was the
first who perceived from shore the enemy's fleet advance in good order to
attack him, upon which he immediately cried out for the troops to embark. In
the height of sorrow and perplexity, some he called to by their names, some he
conjured, and others he forced to go on board their galleys, but all his
endeavors and emotion were ineffectual, the soldiers being dispersed on all
sides. For they were no sooner come on shore than some were run to the
suttlers, some to walk in the country, some to sleep in their tents, and others
had began to dress their suppers. This proceeded from the want of vigilance and
experience in their generals, who, not suspecting the least danger, indulged
themselves in taking their repose, and gave their soldiers the same liberty.

The enemy had already fallen on with loud cries, and a great noise of their
oars, when Conon disengaging himself with nine galleys, of which number was the
sacred ship, he stood away for Cyprus, where he took refuge with Evagoras. The
Peloponnesians falling upon the rest of the fleet, took immediately the galleys
which were empty, and disabled and destroyed such as began to fill with men.
The soldiers who ran without order or arms to their relief, were either killed
in the endeavor to get on board, or flying on shore, were cut to pieces by the
enemy, who landed in pursuit of them. Lysander took three thousand prisoners,
with all the generals, and the whole fleet, after having plundered the camp,
and fastened the enemy's galleys to the sterns of his own, he returned to
Lampsacus amidst the sounds of flutes and songs of triumph. It was his glory to
have achieved one of the greatest military exploits recorded in history with
little or no loss, and to have terminated a war in the small space of an hour
which had already lasted seven and twenty years, and which, perhaps, without
him had been of much longer continuance. Lysander immediately sent dispatches
with this agreeable news to Sparta.

The three thousand prisoners taken in this battle having been condemned to
die, Lysander called upon Philocles, one of the Athenian generals, who had
caused all the prisoners taken in two galleys, the one of Andros, the other of
Corinth, to be thrown from the top of a precipice, and had formerly persuaded
the people of Athens to make a decree for cutting off the thumb of the right
hand of all the prisoners of war, in order to disable them for handling the
pike, and that they might be fit only to serve at the oar. Lysander, therefore,
caused him to be brought forth, and asked him what sentence he would pass upon
himself for having induced his city to pass that cruel decree. Philocles,
without departing from his haughtiness in the least, notwithstanding the
extreme danger he was in, made answer: "Accuse not people of crimes who have no
judges, but as you are victors, use your right, and do by us as we had done by
you if we had conquered." At the same instant he went into a bath, put on
afterward a magnificent robe, and marched foremost to the execution. All the
prisoners were put to the sword except Adamantus, who had opposed the decree.

When the news of the entire defeat of the army came to Athens, by a ship which
arrived in the night at the Piraeus, the city was in consternation. They
naturally expected a siege; and, in fact, Lysander was preparing to besiege
them. Nothing was heard but cries of sorrow and despair in every part of it.
They imagined the enemy already at their gates; they represented to themselves
the miseries of a long siege, a cruel famine, the ruin and burning of their
city, the insolence of a proud victor, and the shameful slavery they were upon
the point of experiencing, more afflicting and insupportable to them than the
most severe punishments, and death itself. The next day the assembly was
summoned, wherein it was resolved to shut up all the ports, one only excepted,
to repair the breaches in the walls, and mount guard to prepare against a siege.

Their fears were soon confirmed by reality. Lysander finding numbers of
Athenians dispersed in different cities, commanded them all on pain of death to
take shelter in Athens. This he did with a design, so to crowd the city as to
be able soon to reduce it by famine. In effect, he soon after arrived at the
port of Athens with an hundred and fifty sail. While Agis and Pausanias, the
two kings of Sparta, advanced with their army to besiege it by land.

The wretched Athenians thus hemmed in on every side, without provisions,
ships, or hopes of relief, prepared to meet the last extremity with patience;
in this manner, without speaking the least word of a capitulation, and dying in
the streets by numbers, they obstinately continued on the defensive; but, at
length, their corn and provisions being entirely consumed, they found
themselves compelled to send deputies to Agis, with offers of abandoning all
their possessions, their city and port only excepted. The haughty Lacedaemonian
referred their deputies to the state itself, and when the suppliant deputies
had made known their commission to the ephori, they were ordered to retire, and
to come with other proposals if they expected peace. At length, Theramenes, an
Athenian, undertook to manage the treaty with Lysander; and, after three months
of close conference, he received full powers to treat at Lacedaemon. When he,
attended by nine others, arrived before the ephori, it was there strongly urged
by some of the confederates, that Athens should be totally destroyed, without
hearkening to any farther proposals. But the Lacedaemonians told them, they
would not destroy a city which had so eminently rescued Greece in the most
critical juncture, and consented to a peace upon these conditions: that the
long walls and fortifications of the Piraeus should be demolished; that they
should deliver up all their ships but twelve; that they should restore their
exiles; that they should make a league offensive and defensive with the
Lacedaemonians, and serve them in all their expeditions, both by sea and land.
Theramenes being returned with the articles to Athens, was asked why he acted
so contrary to the intentions of Themistocles, and gave those walls into the
hands of the Lacedaemonians which he built in defiance of them? I have my eye,
says he, upon Themistocles his design; he raised these walls for the
preservation of the city, and I for the very same reason would have them
destroyed; for, if walls only secure a city, Sparta, which has none, is in a
very ill condition. The Athenians, at another time, would not have thought this
a satisfactory answer, but being reduced to the last extremity, it did not
admit of a long debate whether they should accept the treaty. At last, Lysander
coming up the Piraeus, demolished the walls with great solemnity, and all the
insulting triumphs of music. Thus a final period was put to this unhappy war,
which had continued for seven and twenty years, in which heaps of treasure and
deluge of blood were exhausted.

CHAP. IX. From the Demolition of the ATHENIAN Power to the Death of SOCRATES.
THE victory of Lysander was so terrible a shock to Athens, that it only
survived to be sensible of the loss of its own power; however, the conquerors
were so generous as not to extinguish the name; they said they would not be
guilty of putting out one of the eyes of Greece: but they imposed some farther
marks of conquest on them; they obliged the people to demolish the democracy,
and submit to the government of thirty men, who were commonly known by the name
of the thirty tyrants. Though the Greeks were apt enough to give that name to
men of virtuous characters, these men, who were the creatures of Lysander, in
every respect deserved the most opprobrious denomination; instead of compiling
and publishing a more perfect body of laws, which was the pretense for their
being chosen, they began to exert their power of life and death: and though
they constituted a senate, and other magistrates, they made no farther use of
them than to confirm their authority, and to see their commands executed.
However, they at first acted cautiously, and condemned only the most detested
and scandalous part of the citizens, such as lived by evidencing and informing;
but this was only to give a color to their proceedings; their design was to
make themselves absolute, and knowing that was not to be done without a foreign
power, their next step was to desire a guard might be sent them from Sparta,
until such times as they could clear the city of all disaffected persons, and
thoroughly settle the government. Lysander, accordingly, procured them a guard
under the command of Callibius, who, by bribes and artifices, was wrought over
to their designs, and then seen to act without control, filling the city with
the blood of those who, on account of their riches, interest, or good
qualities, were most likely to make head against them.

One of the first acts of their cruelty was in procuring the death of
Alcibiades, who had taken refuge in the dominions of Persia. This unfortunate
general, still mindful of the debt he owed his country, employed his utmost
attention in giving it the earliest notices of what could effect its freedom or
its safety. Cyrus, the prince of Persia, having resolved to dethrone his
brother Artaxerxes, entered into a treaty with the Lacedaemonians to assist him
in his designs. Alcibiades did all that was in his power to obstruct the
scheme; but the Lacedaemonian partisans at Athens, that is to say, the thirty
tyrants, apprehended the intrigues of so superior a genius as his, and
represented to their masters that they were inevitably ruined, if they did not
find means to rid themselves of Alcibiades. The Lacedaemonians thereupon wrote
to Pharnabasus, and with an abject meanness not to be excused, and which showed
how much Sparta had degenerated from her ancient manners, made pressing
instances to him to deliver them at any rate from so formidable an enemy. This
satrap complied with their wishes. Alcibiades was then in a small town of
Phrygia, where he lived with his concubine Timandra. Those who were sent to
kill him not daring to enter his house, contented themselves with surrounding
and setting it on fire. Alcibiades having quitted it through the flames, sword
in hand, the barbarians were afraid to stay to come to blows with him, but
slying and retreating as he advanced, they poured their darts and arrows upon
him from a distance, and he fell dead upon the spot. Timandra took up his body,
and having adorned and covered it with the finest robes she had, she made as
magnificent a funeral for it as her present condition would admit.

Such was the end of Alcibiades, whose great virtues were stifled and
suppressed by still greater vices. It is not easy to say whether his good or
bad qualities were most pernicious to his country, for with the one he
deceived, and with the other he oppressed it. In him distinguished valor was
united with nobility of blood. His person was beautiful and finely made; he was
eloquent, of great ability in affairs, insinuating, and formed for charming all
mankind. He loved glory, but without prejudice to his inclination sor pleasure,
nor was he so fond of pleasure as to neglect his glory for it: he knew how to
give into, or abstract himself from the allurements of luxury, according to the
situation of his affaris. Never was there ductility of genius equal to his, he
metamorphosed himself with incredible facility, into the most contrary forms,
and supported them all with as much ease and grace as if each had been natural
to him.

In this manner the thirty proceeded, and fearing to be opposed by the
multitude, they invested three thousand citizens with some part of their power,
and by their assistance preserved the rest. But thoroughly emblodened by such
an accession to their party, they agreed to single out every one his man, to
put them to death, and seize their estates for the maintenance of their
gartison. Theramenes, one of their number, was the only man that was struck
with horror at their proceedings; wherefore Critias, the principal author,
thought it necessary to remove him, and accused him to the senate of
endeavoring to subvert the state. Sentence of death was, therefore, passed
upon him, and he was obliged to drink the juice of hemlock, the usual mode of
execution at that time in Athens. Socrates, whose disciple he had been, was the
only person of the senate who ventured to appear in his defense; he made an
attempt to rescue him out of the hands of the officer of justice, and after his
execution went about as it were in defiance of the thirty, exhorting and
animating the senators and citizens against them.

The tyrants, delivered from a colleague whose presence alone was a continual
reproach to them, no longer observed any measures. Nothing passed throughout
the city but imprisonments and murders. Every body trembled for themselves or
their friends. The general desolation had no remedy, nor was there any hope of
regaining lost liberty.

All the citizens of any consideration in Athens, and who retained a love of
freedom, quitted a place reduced to so hard and shameful a slavery, and sought
elsewhere an asylum and retreat where they might live in safety. The
Lacedaemonians had the inhumanity to endeavor to deprive those unhappy
fugitives of this last resource. They published an edict to prohibit the cities
of Greece from giving them refuge, decreed that they should be delivered up to
the thirty tyrants, and condemned all such as should contravene the execution
of this edict to pay a fine of five talents. Only two cities rejected with
disdain so unjust an ordinance, Megara and Thebes, the latter of which made a
decree to punish all persons whatsoever that should see an Athenian attacked by
his enemies without doing his utmost to assist him. Lysias, an orator of
Syracuse, who had been banished by the thirty, raised five hundred soldiers at
his own expense, and sent them to the aid of the common country of eloquence.

Thrasybulus, a man of admirable character, who had long deplored the miseries
of his country, was now the first to relieve it. At Thebes he fell into a
consultation with his fellow-citizens, and the result was, that some vigorous
effort, though it carried never so much danger, ought to be made for the
benefit of public liberty. Accordingly, with a party of thirty men only, as
Nepos says; but, as Xenophon more probably says, of near seventy, he seized
upon Phyle, a strong castle on the frontiers of Attica. This enterprise gave
the alarm to the tyrants, who immediately marched out of Athens with their
three thousand followers, and their Spartan guard, and attempted the recovery
of the place, but were repulsed with loss. Finding they could not carry it by a
sudden assault, they resolved upon a siege, but not being sufficiently provided
for that service, and a great snow falling that night, they were forced to
retire the next day into the city, leaving only part of their guard to prevent
any farther excursions into the country. Encouraged by this success,
Thrasybulus no longer kept himself confined, but marched out of Phyle by night;
and, at the head of a body of a thousand men, seized on the Pyraeus. The thirty
flew thither with their troops, and a battle sufficiently warm ensued; but, as
the soldiers on one side fought with valor and vigor for their liberty, and,
on the other with, indolence and neglect for the power of their oppressors, the
success was not doubtful, but followed the better cause: the tyrants were
overthrown; Critias was killed upon the spot; and, as the rest of the army were
taking to flight, Thrasybulus cried out, "Wherefore do you fly from me as from
a victor, rather than assist me as the avenger of your liberty? We are not
enemies, but fellow-citizens, nor have we declared war against the city, but
against the thirty tyrants." He continued, with bidding them remember that they
had the same origin, country, laws, and religion; he exhorted them to
compassionate their exiled brethren, to restore to them their country, and
resume their liberty themselves. This discourse had suitable effects. The army
upon their return to Athens, expelled the thirty, and substituted ten persons
to govern in their room, but whose conduct proved no better than that of those
whom they succeeded.

Though the government was thus altered, and the thirty were deposed from
power, they still had hopes of being reinstated in their former authority, and
sent deputies to Lacedaemon to demand aid. Lysander was for granting it to
them, but Pausanias, who then reigned in Sparta, moved with compassion at the
deplorable condition of the Athenians, favored them in secret, and obtained a
peace for them; it was sealed with the blood of the tyrants, who having taken
arms to reinstate themselves in government, were put to the sword, and Athens
left in full possession of its liberty. Thrasybulus then proposed an amnesty,
by which the citizens engaged upon oath that all past actions should be buried
in oblivion, and the government was re-established in its ancient forms; their
laws were restored to their past vigor, the magistrates elected with the usual
ceremonies, and democracy was once more restored to this unfortunate people.
Xenophon observes, that this intestine fury had consumed as many in eight
months, as the Peloponnesian war had done in ten years.

Upon the re-establishment of affairs in Athens, the other states enjoyed the
same tranquillity, or rather kept in a quiet subjection to Sparta, which now
held the undoubted sovereignty of Greece. But it being a maxim with the
Spartans, that this sovereignty was not to be maintained but by a constant
course of action; they were still seeking fresh occasions for war; and part of
their forces, together with another body of Grecians, being at this time
engaged in a quarrel between the Persian king and his brother, it will be
necessary to pass over into Asia, and relate so much of the Persian affairs as
concerns the expedition of Cyrus, wherein those forces were employed,
especially since it is attended with circumstances which, if duly considered,
will easily make it pass for one of the greatest actions of antiquity.

It has been already observed, that Cyrus, the son of Darius Nothus, saw with
pain his elder brother Artaxerxes upon the throne, and more than once attempted
to remove him. Artaxerxes was not insensible of what he had to fear from a
brother of his enterprising and ambitious spirit, but could not refuse
pardoning him on the prayers and tears of his mother Parysatis, who doated upon
this youngest son. He removed him, therefore, into Asia to his government,
confiding in him contrary to all the rules of policy, an absolute authority
over the provinces left him by the will of the king his father. He was no
sooner appointed in this manner, but he used all his arts with the barbarians
and the Grecians to procure power and popularity, in order to dethrone his
brother. Clearches retired to his court, after having been banished from
Sparta, and was of great service to him, being an able, experienced, and
valiant captain. At the same time, several cities in the provinces of
Tissaphernes revolted from their obedience in favor of Cyrus. This incident,
which was not an effect of chance, but of the secret practices of that prince,
gave birth to a war between the two brothers. The emissaries of Cyrus at the
court, were perpetually dispersing reports and opinions amongst the people to
prepare their minds for the intended change and revolt. They talked that the
state required a king of Cyrus's character, a king magnificent, liberal, who
loved war, and showered his favors upon those that served him; and that it was
necessary, for the grandeur of the empire, to have a prince upon the throne
sired with ambition and valor, for the support and augmentation of his glory.

The troops of Cyrus, which were apparently levied for the business of the
state, but in fact to overturn it, consisted of thirteen thousand Greeks, which
were the flower and chief force of his army. Clearches, the Lacedaemonian, who
commanded the Peloponnesian troops, was the only man of all the Greeks that was
let into the Persian prince's design; he made it his sole application to gain
the affections of his people during their marches, by treating them with
humanity, conversing freely with them, and giving effectual orders that they
should want for nothing. The Grecian troops knew neither the intent nor the
occasion of the war; they set out for Sardis, at length, and marched toward
the upper provinces of Athens.

When they were arrived at Tarfus, the Greeks refused to march any farther,
rightly suspecting that they were intended against the king, and loudly
exclaiming that they had not entered into the service upon that condition.
Clearchus, who commanded them, had occasion for all his address and ability to
stifle this commotion in its birth. At first he made use of authority and
force, but with very ill success, and desisted therefore from an open
opposition to their sentiments: he even affected to enter into their views, and
to support them with his approbation and credit. By this artful evasion he
appeased the tumult, and made them easy; and they chose him and some other
officers for their deputies. Cyrus, whom he had secretly apprised of every
thing, made answer, that he was going to attack Abrocomas, his enemy, at twelve
days march from thence upon the Euphrates. When this answer was repeated to
them, though they plainly saw against whom they were going, they resolved to
proceed, and only demanded an augmentation of their pay. Cyrus, instead of one
daric a month to each soldier, promised to give them one and a half. Still to
ingratiate himself the more, being told that two officers had deserted from the
army, and being advised to pursue and put them to death, he declared publicly,
that it should never be said he had detained any one person in his service
against his will; and he ordered their wives and children, who were left as
hostages in his army, to be sent after them. A conduct so wise, and apparently
generous, had a surprising effect in conciliating the affections of the
soldiery, and made even those his firm adherents who were before inclined to
retire.

As Cyrus advanced by long marches, he was informed from all parts, that the
king did not intend to come directly to a battle, but had resolved to wait in
the remotest parts of Persia till all his forces were assembled; and that, to
stop his enemies, he had ordered an intrenchment to be thrown up on the plains
of Babylon, with a ditch of five fathoms broad, and three deep, extending the
space of twelve parasangs, or leagues, from the Euphrates to the wall of Media.
Between the Euphrates and the ditch, a way had been left of twenty feet in
breadth, by which Cyrus passed with his whole army, having reviewed it the day
before. The king had neglected to dispute this pass with him, and suffered him
to continue his march toward Babylon.

Cyrus still continued to proceed, giving Clearches the command of the right
Grecian wing, and Menon that of the left, still marching in order of battle,
expecting every hour to engage; at length he discovered his brother's army,
consisting of twelve hundred thousand men, besides a select body of six
thousand horse, approaching and preparing to engage.

The place where the battle was fought was called Cunara, about twenty-five
leagues from Babylon. Cyrus getting on horseback, with his javelin in his hand,
gave orders to the troops to stand to their arms, and proceed in order of
battle. The enemy, in the mean time, advanced slowly, in good order. Artaxerxes
led them on regularly with a slow pace, without noise or confusion. That good
order and exact discipline extremely surprised the Greeks, who expected to see
much luxury and tumult in so great a multitude, and to hear confused cries, as
Cyrus had foretold them.

The armies were not distant above four or five hundred paces, when the Greeks
began to sing the hymn of battle, and to march on softly at first, and with
silence. When they came near the enemy, they set up great cries, striking their
darts upon their shields to frighten the horse; and then moving all together,
they sprung forwards upon the barbarians with all their force, who did not wait
their charge, but took to their heels and fled universally, except
Tissaphernes, who stood his ground with a small part of his troops.

Cyrus saw with pleasure the enemy routed by the Greeks, and was proclaimed
king by those around him: but he did not give himself up to a vain joy, nor as
yet reckoned himself victor. He perceived that Artaxerxes was wheeling his
right to attack him in flank, and marched directly against him with his six
hundred horse. He killed Artagerses, who commanded the king's guard of six
thousand horse, with his own hand, and put the whole body to flight.
Discovering his brother, he cried out with his eyes sparkling with rage, I see
him, and spurred against him, followed only by his principal officers, for his
troops had quitted their ranks to follow the run-aways, which was an essential
fault.

The battle then became a single combat in some measure between Artaxerxes and
Cyrus, and the two brothers were seen transported with rage and fury,
endeavoring like Eteocles and Polynices to plunge their swords into each
others hearts, and to assure themselves of the throne by the death of their
rival.

Cyrus having opened his way through those who were drawn up in battle before
Artaxerxes, joined him, and killed his horse, that fell with him to the ground:
he rose, and was remounted upon another, when Cyrus attacked him again, gave
him a second wound, and was preparing to give him a third, in hopes that it
would prove his last. The king, like a lion wounded by the huntsman, was only
the more furious from the smart, and sprung forwards, impetuously pushing his
horse against Cyrus, who running headlong, and without regard to his person,
threw himself into the midst of a flight of darts aimed at him from all sides,
and received a wound from the king's javelin at the instant that all the rest
discharged upon him. Cyrus fell dead; some say by the wound given him by the
king, others affirm that he was killed by a Carian soldier. The greatest
persons of his court resolving not to survive so good a master, were all killed
around his body; a certain proof, says Xenophon, that he well knew how to choose
his friends, and that he was truly beloved by them. Ariaeus, who ought to have
been the firmest of all his adherents, fled with the left wing as soon as he
heard of his death.

Artaxerxes, after having caused the head and right hand of his brother to be
cut off by the eunuch Mesabates, pursued the enemy into their camp. Ariaeus had
not stopped there, but having passed through it, continued his retreat to the
place where the army had encamped the day before, which was about four leagues
distant.

Tissaphernes, after the defeat of the greatest part of his lest wing by the
Greeks, led on the rest against them, and, by the side of the river, passed
through the light armed infantry of the Greeks, who opened to give him a
passage, and made their discharges upon him as he passed, without losing a man.
They were commanded by Episthenes of Amphipolis, who was esteemed an able
captain. Tissaphernes kept on without returning to the charge, because he
perceived he was too weak, and went forward to Cyrus's camp, where he found the
king, who was plundering it, but had not been able to force the quarter
defended by the Greeks, who saved their baggage.

The Greeks on their side, and Artaxerxes on his, who did not know what had
passed elsewhere, believed each of them that they had gained the victory; the
first, because they had put the enemy to flight, and pursued them; and the
king, because he had killed his brother, beat the troops he had fought, and
plundered their camp. The event was soon cleared up on both sides.
Tissaphernes, upon his arrival at the camp, informed the king, that the Greeks
had defeated his left wing, and pursued it with great vigor; and the Greeks,
on their side, learnt, that the king in pursuing Cyrus's left had penetrated
into the camp. Upon this advice the king rallied his troops, and marched in
quest of the enemy; and Clearchus being returned from pursuing the Persians,
advanced to support the camp.

The two armies were soon very near each other, when, by a movement made by the
king, he seemed to intend to charge the Greeks on their left, who fearing to be
surrounded on all sides, wheeled about and halted, with the river on their
backs, to prevent their being taken in the rear. Upon seeing that, the king
changed his form of battle also, drew up his army in front of them, and marched
on to the attack. As soon as the Greeks saw him approach, they began to sing
the hymn of battle, and advanced against the enemy even with more ardour than
in the first action.

The barbarians again began to fly, running farther than before, and were
pursued to a village at the foot of a hill, upon which their horse halted. The
king's standard was observed to be there, which was a golden eagle upon the top
of a pike, having its wings displayed. The Greeks preparing to pursue them,
they abandoned also the hill, fled precipitately with all their troops broke,
and in the utmost disorder and confusion. Clearchus having drawn up the Greeks
at the bottom of the hill, ordered Lycias, the Syracusan, and another, to go up
it and observe what passed in the plain. They returned with an account that the
enemies fled on all sides, and that their whole army was routed.

As it was almost night, the Greeks laid down their arms to rest themselves,
much surprised that neither Cyrus, nor any one from him appeared; and
imagining, that he was either engaged in the pursuit of the enemy, or was
making haste to possess himself of some important place, for they were still
ignorant of his death, and the defeat of the rest of his army; they determined,
to return to their camp, and found the greatest part of the baggage taken, with
all the provisions, and four hundred wagons laden with corn and wine, which
Cyrus had expressly caused to be carried along with the army for the Greeks, in
case of any pressing necessity. They passed the night in the camp, the greatest
part of them without any refreshment, concluding that Cyrus was alive and
victorious.

Amidst the confusion the Grecians were in after the battle, they sent to
Ariaeus, as conqueror and commander in chief, upon Cyrus's death, to offer him
the Persian crown. In the mean time, the king, as conqueror, also on his side,
sent to them to surrender their arms, and implore his mercy, representing to
them, at the same time, that as they were in the heart of his dominions,
surrounded with vast rivers, and numberless nations, it would be impossible for
them to escape his vengeance; and, therefore, they had nothing to do but to
submit to the present necessity. Upon debating among themselves what answer
they should return, Proxenus desired to know of the heralds upon what terms the
king demanded their arms: if, as conqueror, it was in his power to take them;
if upon any other footing, what would he give them in return. He was seconded
by Xenophon, who said, they had nothing left but their arms and their liberty,
and that they could not preserve the one without the other. Clearchus said to
the same effect, that if the king was disposed to be their friend, they should
be in a better capacity of serving him with arms than without; if their enemy,
they should have need of them for their defense. Some indeed spoke in terms
more complying; that as they had served Cyrus faithfully, they would also serve
Artaxerxes, if he would employ them, and provided he would, at the same time,
put them in possession of Egypt. At last it was agreed, they should remain in
the place where they were; and that if they advanced farther, or retreated
back, it should be looked upon as a declaration of war: so that by the issue of
the debate, it appeared to have been managed so as to avoid giving a direct
answer, but only to amuse the king and gain time.

Whilst this treaty was on foot, they received Ariaeus's answer, that there
were too many powerful men in Persia to let him possess the throne; wherefore
he intended to set out early the next morning on his return to Greece; and
that, if they had a mind to accompany him, they should join him that night in
his camp: which accordingly they all did, except Milthocytus, a Thracian, who
went with a party of three hundred men and forty horse to the king. The rest,
in conjunction with Ariaeus's forces, decamped by break of day, and continued
their march until sunset, when they discovered from the neighboring villages
that the king was in pursuit of them.

Clearchus, who now undertook to conduct the Greeks, ordered his troops to
halt, and prepared for an engagement. The king of Persia terrified by so bold
an appearance, sent heralds not to demand their surrender, but to propose terms
of peace and treaty. When Clearchus was informed of their arrival, he gave
orders to bid them wait, and to tell them that he was not yet at leisure to
hear them. He assumed purposely an air of haughtiness and grandeur, to denote
his intrepidity, and, at the same time, to show the fine appearance and good
condition of his phalanx. When he advanced with the most shewy of his officers,
expressly chosen for the occasion, and had heard what the heralds had to
propose; he made answer, that they must begin with giving battle, because the
army being in want of provisions had no time to lose. The heralds having
carried back this answer to their master, returned immediately, which showed
that the king, or whoever spoke in his name, was not very far distant. They
said they had orders to conduct them to villages where they would find
provisions in abundance, and conducted them thither accordingly.

After three days stay Tissaphernes arrived from the king, and insinuated to
them the good offices he had employed for their safety. Clearchus in his own
defense urged, that they were engaged in this expedition without knowing the
enemy against whom they were to contend; that they were free from all
engagements, and had no design against the Persian king, unless he opposed
their return. Tissaphernes seemingly granted their desire, and promised that
they should be furnished with all necessary provisions in their march; and to
confirm their security, that he himself would be their companion on the way.

Accordingly, in a few days after they set out under his conduct; but, in their
march, the barbarians encamping at about a league's distance from the Grecians,
created some little distrusts and jealousies on both sides. In about fifty
days, being got to the banks of the river Zabatus, Clearchus, to prevent things
coming to an open rupture, had a conference with Tissaphernes. The result of
their discourse was, that they had been misrepresented to each other by some of
Clearchus's officers; and that he should bring them all to Tissaphernes, in
order to detect those who were guilty. In consequence of this, it was agreed
between them that there should be a general consultation of officers, in which
those who had been remiss, or attempted to sow any dissensions between the two
armies, should be exposed and punished. Menon, in particular, was suspected on
both sides, and he was appointed among the number. In consequence of this fatal
resolution, the five principal generals attended the succeeding day at the
Persian general's tent. Their names were, Clearchus, Menon, Proxenes, Agias,
and Socrates; they, on a signal given, were immediately seized, their
attendants put to the sword, and themselves, after being sent bound to the
king, were beheaded in his presence.

Nothing could exceed the consternation of the Greeks when they were informed
of the massacre of their generals: they were now near two thousand miles from
home, surrounded with great rivers, extensive deserts, and inimical nations,
without any supplies of provisions. In this state of general dejection, they
could think of taking neither nourishment nor repose; all now turned their eyes
upon Xenophon, a young Athenian, who had been invited into Asia by Proxences,
and had hitherto served as a volunteer in the army: this was that Xenophon
afterward so famous as an historian; and his conduct seemed equal to his
eloquence, in which he surpassed all the rest of mankind. This young general
went to some of the Greek officers in the middle of the night, and represented
to them that they had no time to lose; that it was of the last importance to
prevent the bad designs of the enemy; that, however small their number, they
would render themselves formidable, if they behaved with boldness and
resolution; that valor, and not multitudes, determines the success of arms;
and that it was necessary, above all things, to nominate generals immediately,
because an army without commanders is like a body without a soul. A council was
immediately held, at which an hundred officers were present; and Xenophon being
desired to speak, deduced the reasons at large he had at first but lightly
touched upon: and, by his advice, commanders were appointed. They were,
Timasion for Clearchus, Xanthicles for Socrates, Cleanor for Agis, Philesius
for Menon, and Xenophon for Proxenes.

Before the break of day they assembled the army. The generals made speeches to
animate the troops; and Xenophon, among the rest. "Fellow Soldiers, said he,
the loss of so many brave men by vile treachery, and the being abandoned by our
friends, is very deplorable; but we must not sink under our misfortunes: and,
if we cannot conquer, let us choose rather to perish gloriously than to fall
into the hands of barbarians, who would inflict upon us the greatest miseries;
let us call to mind the glorious battles of Plataea, Thermopylae, Salamis, and
the many others wherein our ancestors, though with a small number, have fought
and defeated the innumerable armies of the Persians, and thereby rendered the
name alone of Greeks for ever formidable. It is to their invincible valor we
owe the honor we possess of acknowledging no masters upon earth but the gods,
nor any happiness but what consists with liberty. Those gods, the avengers of
perjury, and witnesses of the enemy's treason, will be favorable to us; and,
as they are attacked in the violation of treaties, and take pleasure in
humbling the proud, and exalting the low, they will also follow us to battle
and combat for us. For the rest, fellow soldiers, as we have no refuge but in
victory, which must be our hope, and will make us ample amends for whatever it
costs to attain it; I should believe, if it were your opinion, that for the
making a more ready and less difficult retreat, it would be very proper to rid
ourselves of all the useless baggage, and to keep only what is absolutely
necessary in our march." All the soldiers that moment lifted up their hands, to
signify their approbation and consent to all that had been said, and without
loss of time set fire to their tents and carriages; such of them as had too
much equipage, giving it others who had too little, and destroying the rest.

Cherisophus, the Spartan general, led the van, and Xenophon, with Tymasion,
brought up the rear. They bent their march toward the heads of the great
rivers, in order to pass them where they were fordable. But they had made
little way before they were followed by a party of the enemy's archers and
slingers, commanded by Mithridates, which galled their rear, and wounded
several of them, who being heavy armed, and without cavalry, could make no
resistance. To prevent the like inconvenience, Xenophon furnished two hundred
Rhodians with slings, and mounted fifty more of his men upon baggage-horses; so
that when Mithridates came up with them a second time, and with a much greater
body, he repulsed them with loss, and made good his retreat with this handful
of men, until he arrived near the city of Larissa, on the banks of the Tigris.
From thence they marched to another desolate city, called Mepsila, and about
four leagues from that place Tissaphernes came up to them with his whole army
in order of battle, but after several skirmishes was forced to retire. In a few
days after he secured an eminence over which the Grecians were obliged to make
their way, which Xenophon perceiving, took a detachment of the army, and with
great diligence gained the top of a mountain which commanded that eminence,
from whence he easily dislodged the enemy, and made good a passage for the rest
of his troops into the plain, where they found plenty of provisions, though
Tissaphernes had done what he could before to burn and destroy the country.

But still they were under as great difficulties as ever, being bounded on the
one hand by the Tigris, and on the other by inaccessible mountains, inhabited
by the Carduch, a fierce and warlike people; and who, Xenophon says, had cut
off an army of six score thousand Persians to a man, by reason of the
difficulty of the ways. However, having no boats to cross the river, and the
passage through the mountains opening into the rich plains of Armenia, they
resolved to pursue their march that way. These barbarians soon took the alarm,
but not being prepared to meet the Greeks in a body, they possessed themselves
of the tops of the rocks and mountains, and from thence annoyed them with darts
and great stones, which they threw down into the desiles through which they
passed, in which they were also attacked by several other parties; and though
their loss was not considerable, yet, what with storms and famine, besides
seven tedious days march, and being continually forced to fight their way, they
underwent more fatigue and hardship than they had suffered from the Persians
during the whole expedition.

They found themselves soon after exposed to new dangers. Almost at the foot of
the mountains, they came to a river two hundred feet in breadth, called
Centrites, which stopped their march. They had to defend themselves against the
enemy, who pursued them in the rear, and the Armenians, the soldiers of the
country, who defended the opposite side of the river. They attempted in vain to
pass it in a place where the water came up to their arm pits, and were carried
away by the rapidity of the current, against which the weight of their arms
made them unable to resist. By good fortune they discovered another place not
so deep, where some soldiers had seen the people of the country pass. It
required abundance of address, diligence, and valor, to keep off the enemy on
both sides of them. The army, however, passed the river at length without much
loss.

They marched forwards with less interruption, passed the source of the Tygris,
and arrived at the little river Teleboa, which is very beautiful, and has many
villages on its banks. Here began the western Armenia, which was governed by
Tiribasus, a satrap much beloved by the king, and who had the honor to help
him to mount on horseback when at the court. He offered to let the army pass,
and to suffer the soldiers to take all they wanted, upon condition that they
should commit no ravages in their march; which proposal was accepted and
ratified on each side. Tiribasus kept always a flying camp at a small distance
from the army. There fell a great quantity of snow, which gave the troops some
inconvenience; and they learnt from a prisoner, that Tiribasus had a design to
attack the Greeks at a pass of the mountains, in a defile through which they
must necessarily march. They prevented him, by seizing that post, after having
put the enemy to flight. After some days march through the desert, they passed
the Euphrates near its source, not having the water above their middles.

They suffered exceedingly afterward from a north wind, which blew in their
faces, and prevented respiration; so that it was thought necessary to sacrifice
to the wind, upon which it seemed to abate. They marched on in snow five or six
feet deep, which killed several servants and beasts of burden, besides thirty
soldiers. They made fires during the night, for they found plenty of wood. All
the next day they continued their march through the snow, when many of them,
from the excess of hunger, followed with languor, or fainting, continued lying
upon the ground through weakness and want of spirits: when something had been
given them to eat, they found themselves relived, and continued their march.

After a march of seven days they arrived at the river Araxes, called also the
Phasus, which is about an hundred feet in breadth. Two days after they
discovered the Phasians, the Chalybes, and the T^ochians, who kept the pass of
the mountain to prevent their descending into the plain. They saw it was
impossible to avoid coming to a battle with them, and resolved to give it the
same day. Xenophon, who had observed that the enemy defended only the ordinary
passage, and that the mountain was three leagues in extent, proposed the
sending a detachment to take possession of the heights that commanded the
enemy, which would not be difficult, as they might prevent all suspicion of
their design by a march in the night, and by making a false attack by the main
road to amuse the barbarians. This was accordingly executed, the enemy put to
slight, and the pass cleared. Thus, after twelve or fifteen days march, they
arrived at a very high mountain, called Tecqua, from whence they descried the
sea. The first who perceived it raised great shouts of joy for a considerable
time, which made Xenophon imagine that the vanguard was attacked, and went with
all haste to support it. As he approached nearer, the cry of the sea! the sea!
was heard distinctly, and the alarm changed into joy and gaiety; and when they
came to the top, nothing was heard but a confused noise of the whole army,
crying out together, the sea! the sea! whilst they could not refrain from
tears, nor from embracing their generals and officers; and then, without
waiting for orders, they heaped up a pile of stones, and erected a trophy with
broken bucklers and other arms.

From thence they advanced to the mountains of Colchis, one of which was higher
than the rest, and of that the people of the country had possessed themselves.
The Greeks drew up in battle at the bottom of it to ascend, for the access was
not impracticable. Xenophon did not judge it proper to march in line of battle,
but by files, because the soldiers could not keep their ranks from the
inequality of the ground, that in some places were easy, in others difficult to
climb, which might discourage them. That advice was approved, and the army
formed according to it. The heavyarmed troops amounted to fourscore files, each
consisting of about one hundred men; with eighteen hundred light-armed
soldiers, divided in three bodies, one of which was posted on the right,
another on the left, and a third in the center. After having encouraged his
troops, by representing to them that this was the last obstacle they had to
surmount, and implored the assistance of the gods, the army began to ascend the
hill. The enemy were not able to support their charge, and dispersed. They
passed the mountain, and encamped in villages, where they found provisions in
abundance.

A very strange accident happened there to the army, which put them into great
consternation; for the soldiers finding abundance of beehives in that place,
and eating the honey, they were taken with violent vomiting and fluxes,
attended with raving fits; so that those who were least ill seemed like drunken
men, and the rest either furiously mad or dying. The earth was strewed with
their bodies as after a defeat; however, none of them died, and the distemper
ceased the next day, about the same hour it had taken them. The third or fourth
day the soldiers got up, but in the condition people are in after taking a
violent medicine.

Two days after the army arrived near Trebisond, a Greek colony of Sinopians,
situated upon the Euxine, or Black Sea, in the province of Colchis. Here they
lay encamped for thirty days, and acquitted themselves of the vows they had
made to Jupiter, Hercules, and the other deities, to obtain an happy return
into their own country: they also celebrated the games of horse and foot races,
wrestling, boxing, the pancratium, the whole attended with the greatest joy and
solemnity. Here Xenophon formed a project of settling them in those parts, and
founding a Grecian colony, which was approved of by some; but his enemies
representing it to the army only as a more honorable way of abandoning them;
and to the inhabitants as a design to subdue and enslave the country, he was
forced to give over that enterprise. However, the noise of it had this good
effect, that the natives did what they could in a friendly manner to procure
their departure, advising them to go by sea as the safest way, and furnished
them with a sufficient number of transports for that purpose.

Accordingly they embarked with a fair wind, and the next day got into the
harbor of Sinope, where Cherisophus met them with some galleys; but instead of
the money they had also expected from him, he only told them they should be
paid their arrears as soon as they got out of the Euxine sea. But this answer
occasioned a great deal of murmuring and discontent among them; so that they
resolved to put themselves under one general, desiring Xenophon in the most
pressing and affectionate terms to accept of that command, which he modestly
declined, and procured the choice to fall upon Cherisophus. But he enjoyed it
not above six or seven days; for no sooner were they arrived at Heraclea, than
the army deposed him for refusing to extort a sum of money from the inhabitants
of that city; which being a Grecian colony, Xenophon likewise refused to
concern himself in that affair; so that the army being disappointed in their
hopes of plunder, fell into a mutiny, and divided into three bodies, after
suffering a slight retreat. When divided from their barbarian enemies, they
were happily reunited and encamped at the port of Calpe, where they settled the
command as before, substituting Neon in the room of Cherisophus, who died here,
and making it death for any man henceforward to propose the dividing of the
army. But being streightened for provisions, they were forced to spread
themselves in the valleys, where Pharnabazus's horse, being joined by the
inhabitants, cut in pieces five hundred of them; the rest escaping to a hill,
were rescued and brought off by Xenophon, who after this led them through a
large forest, where Pharnabazus had posted his troops to oppose their passage;
but they entirely defeated him, and pursued their march to Chrysopolis of
Chalcedon, having got a great deal of booty in their way, and from thence to
Byzantium.

From thence he led them to Salmydessa, to serve Seuthes prince of Thrace, who
had beforce solicited Xenophon by his envoys to bring troops to his aid, in
order to his re-establishment in his father's dominions, of which his enemies
had deprived him. He had made Xenophon great promises for himself and his
troops; but when he had done him the service he wanted, he was so far from
keeping his word, that he did not give them the pay agreed upon. Xenophon
reproached him exceedingly with this breach of faith, imputing his perfidy to
his minister Heraclides, who thought to make his court to his master by saving
him a sum of money at the expense of justice, faith, and honesty, qualities
which ought to be dearer than all others to a prince, as they contribute the
most to his reputation, as well as to the success of affairs, and the security
of a state. But that treacherous minister, who looked upon honor, probity, and
justice as mere chimeras; and that there was nothing real but the possession of
much money, had no thoughts, in consequence, but of enriching himself by any
means whatsoever, and robbed his master first with impunity, and all his
subjects along with him. However, continued Xenophon, every wise man,
especially in authority and command, ought to regard justice, probity, and the
faith of engagements as the most precious treasure he can possess, and as an
assured resource and an infallible support in all the events that can happen.
Heraclides was the more in the wrong for acting in this manner with regard to
the troops, as he was a native of Greece, and not a Thracian; but avarice had
extinguished all sense of honor in him.

Whilst the dispute between Seuthes and Xenophon was warmest, Charminus and
Polynices arrived as ambassadors from Lacedaemon, and brought advice, that the
republic had declared war against Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus; that Thimbron
had already embarked with the troops, and promised a darick a month to every
soldier, two to each officer, and four to the colonels, who should engage in
the service. Xenophon accepted the offer, and having obtained from Seuthes, by
the mediation of the ambassadors, part of the pay due to him, he went by sea to
Lampsacus with the army, which amounted at that time to almost six thousand
men. From thence he advanced to Pergamus, a city in the province of Troas.
Having met near Parthenia, where ended the expedition of the Greeks, a great
nobleman returning into Persia, he took him, his wife and children, with all
his equipage, and by that means found himself in a condition to bestow great
liberalities amongst the soldiers, and to make them a satisfactory amends for
all the losses they had sustained. Thimbron at length arrived, who took upon
him the command of the troops, and having joined them with his own, marched
against Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus.

Such was the event of Cyrus's expedition. Xenophon reckons from the first
setting out of that prince's army from the city of Ephesus to their arrival
where the battle was fought, five hundred and thirty parasangas, or leagues,
and fourscore and thirteen days march; and in their return from the place of
battle to Cotyora, a city upon the coast of the Euxine, or Black Sea, six
hundred and twenty parasangas, or leagues, and one hundred and twenty days
march; and, adding both together, he says the way going and coming was eleven
hundred and fifty-five parasangas, or leagues, and two hundred and fifteen days
march; and that the whole time the army took to perform that journey, including
the days of rest, was fifteen months.

This retreat of the ten thousand Greeks has always passed among judges of the
art of war as a most extraordinary undertaking, and it, in some measure,
inspired them ever after with a contempt for the power of the Persians; it
taught them, that their dominions could be invaded without danger, and that
marching into Persia was but pursuing an unresisting enemy, that only appeared
to offer victory rather than battle.

In the mean time, while Greece was gaining fame in Persia, Athens was losing
its honor at home: though it had now some breathingtime to recover from its
late confusions, yet still there were the seeds of rancour remaining, and the
citizens opposed each other with unremitting malice. Socrates was the first
object that fell a sacrifice to these popular dissensions. We have already seen
this great man, who was the son of an obscure citizen at Athens, emerging from
the meanness of his birth, and giving examples of courage, moderation, and
wisdom; we have seen him saving the life of Alcibiades in battle, of refusing
to concur in the edict which unjustly doomed the six Athenian generals to
death, of withstanding the thirty tyrants, and of spurning the bigotry and
persecution of the times with the most acute penetration, and the most caustic
raillery; he possessed unexampled goodnature, and an universal love to
mankind; he was ready to pity vices in others, while he was in a great measure
free from them himself; however, he knew his own defects, and if he was proud
of any thing, it was in the being thought to have none. He seemed, says
Libanius, the common father of the republic, so attentive was he to the
happiness and advantage of his whole country. But as it is very difficult to
correct the aged, and to make people change principles, who revere the errors
in which they have grown gray, he devoted his labors principally to the
instruction of youth, in order to sow the seeds of virtue in a soil more fit to
produce the fruits of it. He had no open school like the rest of the
philosophers, nor set times for his lessons; he had no benches prepared, nor
ever mounted a professor's chair; he was the philosopher of all times and
seasons; he taught in all places, and upon all occasions, in walking,
conversation at meals, in the army, and in the midst of the camp, in the public
assemblies of the senate or people. Such was the man whom a faction in the city
had long devoted to destruction; he had been for many years before his death
the object of their satire and ridicule. Aristophanes, the comic poet, was
engaged to expose him upon the stage: he composed a piece called the Clouds,
wherein he introduced the philosopher in a basket, uttering the most ridiculous
absurdities. Socrates, who was present at the exhibition of his own character,
seemed not to feel the least emotion; and, as some strangers were present who
desired to know the original for whom the play was intended, he rose up from
his seat, and showed himself during the whole representation. This was the
first blow struck at him, and it was not till twenty years after that Melitus
appeared in a more formal manner as his accuser, and entered a regular process
against him. His accusation consisted of two heads; the first was, that he did
not admit the gods acknowledged by the republic, and introduced new divinities:
the second, that he corrupted the youth of Athens; and concluded with inferring
that sentence of death ought to pass against him. How far the whole charge
affected him is not easy to determine: it is certain, that amidst so much zeal
and superstition as then reigned in Athens, he never durst openly oppose the
received religion, and was therefore sorced to preserve an outward show of it;
but it is very probable, from the discourses he frequently held with his
friends, that in his heart he despised and laughed at their monstrous opinions
and ridiculous mysteries, as having no other foundation than the fables of the
poets; and that he had attained to the notion of the one only true God,
insomuch, that upon the account both of his belief of the Deity, and the
exemplariness of his life, some have thought fit to rank him with the Christian
philosophers.

As soon as the conspiracy broke out, the friends of Socrates prepared for his
defense. Lycias, the must able orator of his time, brought him an elaborate
discourse of his composing, wherein he had set forth the reasons and measures
of Socrates in their full force, and interspered the whole with tender and
pathetic strokes, capable of moving the most obdurate hearts. Socrates read it
with pleasure, and approved it very much; but, as it was more conformable to
the rules of rhetoric, than the sentiments and fortitude of a philosopher, he
told him frankly, that it did not suit him. Upon which Lycias having asked how
it was possible to be well done, and at the same time not suit him? In the same
manner, said he, using according to his custom a vulgar comparison, that an
excellent workman might bring me magnificent apparel, or shoes embroidered with
gold, to which nothing would be wanting on his part, but which, however, would
not fit me. He persisted, therefore, inflexibly in the resolution not to demean
himself by begging suffrages in the low abject manner common at that time. He
employed neither artifice nor the glitter of eloquence; he had no recourse
either to solicitation or entreaty; he brought neither his wife nor children
to incline the judges in his favor by their sighs and tears: nevertheless,
though he firmly refused to make use of any other voice but his own in his
defense, and to appear before his judges in the submissive posture of a
suppliant, he did not behave in that manner out of pride or contempt of the
tribunal; it was from a noble and intrepid assurance, resulting from greatness
of soul, and the consciousness of his truth and innocence; so that his defense
had nothing timorous or weak in it: his discourse was bold, manly, generous,
without passion, without emotion, full of the noble liberty of a philosopher,
with no other ornament than that of truth, and brightened universally with the
character and language of innocence. Plato, who was present, transcribed it
afterward, and without any additions, composed from it the work which he calls
the Apology of Socrates, one of the most consummate masterpieces of antiquity.
I shall here make an extract from it.

Upon the day assigned, the proceedings commenced in the usual forms; the
parties appeared before the judges, and Melitus spoke: the worse his cause, and
the less provided it was with proofs, the more occasion he had for address and
art to cover its weakness; he omitted nothing that might render the adverse
party odious; and, instead of reasons which could not but fail him, he
substituted the delusive shine of a lively and pompous eloquence. Socrates, in
observing, that he could not tell what impression the discourse of his accusers
might make upon the judges, owns, that for his part, he scarce knew himself,
they had given such artful coloring and likelihood to their arguments, though
there was not the least word of truth in all they had advanced.

I am accused of corrupting the youth, and of instilling dangerous maxims into
them, as well in regard to the worship of the gods as the rules of government.
You know, Athenians, that I never made it my profession to teach, nor can envy,
however violent against me, reproach me with having ever sold my instructions.
I have an undeniable evidence for me in this respect, which is my poverty.
Always equally ready to communicate my thoughts either to the rich or poor, and
to give them entire leisure to question or answer me. I lend myself to every
one who is desirous of becoming virtuous; and if, amongst those who hear me,
there are any that prove either good or bad, neither the virtues of the one,
nor the vices of the other, to which I have not contributed, are to be ascribed
to me. My whole employment is to persuade the young and old against too much
love for the body, for riches, and all other precarious things, of whatsoever
nature they be; and against too little regard for the soul, which ought to be
the object of their affection. For I incessantly urge to you, that virtue does
not proceed from riches; but, on the contrary, riches from virtue; and that the
all other goods of human life, as well public as private, have their source in
the same principle.

If to speak in this manner be to corrupt youth, I confess, Athenians, that I
am guilty, and deserve to be punished. If what I say be not true, it is most
easy to convict me of my falsehood. I see here a great number of my disciples;
they have only to appear. But, perhaps, the reserve and consideration for a
master who has instructed them, will prevent them from declaring against me; at
least their fathers, brothers, and uncles cannot, as good relations and good
citizens, dispense with their not standing forth to demand vengeance against
the corrupter of their sons, brothers, and nephews. But these are the persons
who take upon them my defense, and interest themselves in the success of my
cause.

Pass on me what sentence you please, Athenians; but I can neither repent or
change my conduct; I must not abandon or suspend a function which God himself
has imposed on me. Now he has charged me with the care of instructing my
fellow-citizens. If after having faithfully kept all the posts wherein I was
placed by our generals at Potidaea, Amphipolis, and Delium, the fear of death
should at this time make me abandon that in which the divine Providence has
placed me, by commanding me to pass my life in the study of philosophy for the
instruction of myself and others; this would be a most criminal desertion
indeed, and make me highly worthy of being cited before this tribunal as an
impious man who does not believe the gods. Should you resolve to acquit me; for
the future, I should not hesitate to make answer, Athenians, I honor and love
you; but I shall choose rather to obey God than you, and to my latest breath
shall never renounce my philosophy, nor cease to exhort and reprove you
according to my custom, by telling each of you when you come in my way, My good
friend and citizen of the most famous city in the world for wisdom and valor,
are you not ashamed to have no other thoughts than that of amassing wealth and
of acquiring glory, credit, and dignities, whilst you neglect the treasures of
prudence, truth, and wisdom, and take no pains in rendering your soul as good
and perfect as it is capable of being.

I am reproached with abject fear and meanness of spirit, for being so busy in
imparting my advice to every one in private, and for having always avoided to
be present in your assemblies to give my counsels to my country. I think I have
sufficiently proved my courage and fortitude both in the field, where I have
borne arms with you, and in the senate, where I alone opposed the unjust
sentence you pronounced against the ten captains, who had not taken up and
interred the bodies of those who were killed and drowned in the sea fight near
the island Arginusae; and when, upon more than one occasion, I opposed the
violent and cruel orders of the thirty tyrants. What is it then that has
prevented me from appearing in your assemblies? It is that demon, that voice
divine, which you have so often heard me mention, and Melitus has taken so much
pains to ridicule. That spirit has attached itself to me from my infancy: it is
a voice which I never hear but when it would prevent me from persisting in
something I have resolved; for it never exhorts me to undertake any thing: it
is the same being that has always opposed me when I would have intermeddled in
the affairs of the republic, and that with the greatest reason; for I should
have been amongst the dead long ago had I been concerned in the measures of the
state, without effecting any thing to the advantage of myself or our country.
Do not take it ill, I beseech you, if I speak my thoughts without disguise, and
with truth and freedom. Every man who would generously oppose a whole people,
either amongst us or elsewhere, and who inflexibly applies himself to prevent
the violation of the laws, and the practice of iniquity in a government, will
never do so long with impunity. It is absolutely necessary for him, who would
contend for justice, if he has any thoughts of living, to remain in a private
station, and never to have any share in public affairs.

For the rest, Athenians, if, in the extreme danger I now am, I do not imitate
the behavior of those, who upon less emergencies have implored and supplicated
their judges with tears, and have brought forth their children, relations, and
friends; it is not through pride and obstinacy, or any contempt for you, but
solely for your honor, and for that of the whole city. You should know, that
there are amongst our citizens those who do not regard death as an evil, and
who give that name only to injustice and infamy. At my age, and with the
reputation, true or false, which I have, would it be consistent for me, after
all the lessons I have given upon the contempt of death, to be afraid of it
myself, and to belie in my last action all the principles and sentiments of my
past life?

But without speaking of my fame, which I should extremely injure by such a
conduct, I do not think it allowable to entreat a judge, nor to be absolved by
supplications. He ought to be persuaded and convinced. The judge does not sit
upon the bench to show favor, by violating the laws, but to do justice in
conforming to them. He does not swear to discharge with impunity whom he
pleases, but to do justice where it is due: we ought not, therefore, to
accustom you to perjury, nor you to suffer yourselves to be accustomed to it;
for, in so doing, both the one and the other of us equally injure justice and
religion, and both are criminals.

Do not, therefore, expect from me, Athenians, that I should have recourse
amongst you to means which I believe neither honest nor lawful, especially upon
this occasion, wherein I am accused of impiety by Melitus; for, if I should
influence you by my prayers, and thereby induce you to violate your oaths, it
would be undeniably evident, that I teach you not to believe in the gods; and
even in defending and justifying myself, should furnish my adversaries with
arms against me, and prove that I believe no Divinity. But I am very far from
such bad thoughts: I am more convinced of the existence of God than my
accusers; and so convinced, that I abandon myself to God and you, that you may
judge of me as you shall deem best for yourselves and me.

Socrates pronounced this discourse with a firm and intrepid tone: his air, his
action, his visage, expressed nothing of the accused; he seemed the master of
his judges, from the assurance and greatness of soul with which he spoke,
without however losing any thing of the modesty natural to him. But how slight
soever the proofs were against him, the faction was powerful enough to find him
guilty. There was the form of a process against him, and his irreligion was the
pretense upon which it was grounded, but his death was certainly a concerted
thing. His steady uninterrupted course of obstinate virtue, which had made him
in many cases appear singular, and oppose whatever he thought illegal or
unjust, without any regard to times or persons, had procured him a great deal
of envy and ill will.

By his first sentence the judges only declared Socrates guilty; but when, by
his answer, he appeared to appeal from their tribunal to that of justice and
posterity; when, instead of confessing himself guilty, he demanded rewards and
honors from the state, the judges were so very much offended, that they
condemned him to drink hemlock, a method of execution then in use amongst them.

Socrates received this sentence with the utmost composure. Apollodorus, one of
his disciples, launching out into bitter invectives and lamentations that his
master should die innocent: "What," replied Socrates, with a smile, "would you
have had me die guilty? Melitus and Anytus may kill, but they cannot hurt me."

After his sentence he still continued with the same serene and intrepid aspect
with which he had long enforced virtue, and held tyrants in awe; when he
entered his prison, which now became the residence of virtue and probity, his
friends followed him thither, and continued to visit him during the interval
between his condemnation and death, which lasted for thirty days. The cause of
that long delay was, the Athenians sent every year a ship to the isle of Delos,
to offer certain sacrifices, and it was prohibited to put any person to death
in the city from the time the priest of Apollo had crowned the poop of this
vessel as a signal of its departure, till the same vessel should return; so
that sentence having been passed upon Socrates the day after that ceremony
began, it was necessary to defer the execution of it for thirty days, during
the continuance of this voyage.

In this long interval, death had sufficient opportunities to present itself
before his eyes in all its terrors, and to put his constancy to the proof, not
only by the severe rigor of a dungeon, and the irons upon his legs, but by the
continual prospect and cruel expectation of an event of which nature is always
abhorrent. In this sad condition he did not cease to enjoy that profound
tranquillity of mind which his friends had always admired in him. He entertained
them with the same temper he had always expressed; and Crito observes, that the
evening before his death, he slept as peaceably as at any other time. He
composed also an hymn in honor of Apollo and Diana, and turned one of Aesop's
fables into verse.

The day before, or the same day that the ship was to arrive from Delos, the
return of which was to be followed by the death of Socrates, Crito, his
intimate friend, came to him early in the morning to let him know that bad
news; and, at the same time, that it depended only upon himself to quit the
prison; that the jailor was gained; that he would find the doors open, and
offered him a safe retreat in Thessaly. Socrates laughed at this proposal, and
asked him, whither he knew any place out of Attica where people did not die?
Crito urged the thing very seriously, and pressed him to take the advantage of
so precious an opportunity, adding argument upon argument, to induce his
consent, and to engage him to resolve upon his escape: without mentioning the
inconsolable grief he should suffer for the death of such a friend, how should
he support the reproaches of an infinity of people, who would believe that it
was in his power to have saved him, but that he would not sacrifice a small
part of his wealth for that purpose: can the people ever be persuaded that so
wise a man as Socrates would not quit his prison when he might do it with all
possible security? Perhaps he might fear to expose his friends, or to occasion
the loss of their fortunes, or even of their lives or liberty: ought there to
be any thing more dear and precious to them than the preservation of Socrates?
Even strangers themselves dispute that honor with them, many of whom have come
expressly with considerable sums of money to purchase his escape, and declare,
that they should think themselves highly honored to receive him amongst them,
and to supply him abundantly with all he should have occasion for: ought he to
abandon himself to enemies who have occasioned his being condemned unjustly,
and can he think it allowable to betray his own cause? It is not essential to
his goodness and justice to spare his fellow-citizens the guilt of innocent
blood: but if all these motives cannot alter him, and he is not concerned in
regard to himself, can he be insensible to the interests of his children? In
what a condition does he leave them; and can he forget the father to remember
only the philosopher?

Socrates, after having heard him with attention, praised his zeal, and
expressed his gratitude; but before he could give into his opinion, was for
examining whether it was just for him to depart out of prison without the
consent of the Athenians. The question therefore here is, to know whether a man
condemned to die, though unjustly, can without a crime escape from justice and
the laws. Socrates held that it was unjust; and, therefore, nobly refused to
escape from prison. He reverenced the laws of his country, and resolved to obey
them in all things, even in his death.

At length the fatal ship returned to Athens, which was in a manner the signal
for the death of Socrates. The next day all his friends, except Plato, who was
sick, repaired to the prison early in the morning. The jailor desired them to
wait a little, because the eleven magistrates (who had the direction of the
prisons) were at that time signifying to the prisoner that he was to die the
same day. Presently after they entered, and found Socrates, whose chains had
been taken off, sitting by Xantippe, his wife, who held one of his children in
her arms; as soon as she perceived them, setting up great cries, sobbing, and
tearing her face and hair, she made the prison resound with her complaints; Oh,
my dear Socrates! your friends are come to see you this day for the last time!
He desired she might be taken away, and she was immediately carried home.

Socrates passed the rest of the day with his friends, and discoursed with them
with his usual cheerfulness and tranquillity. The subject of conversation was
the most important, but adapted to the present conjuncture; that is to say, the
immortality of the soul. What gave occasion to this discourse was, a question
introduced in a manner by chance, Whether a true philosopher ought not to
desire, and take pains to die? This proposition taken too literally, implied an
opinion, that a philosopher might kill himself. Socrates shows that nothing is
more unjust than this notion; and, that man appertaining to God, who formed and
placed him with his own hand in the post he possesses, cannot abandon it
without his permission, nor depart from life without his order. What is it then
that can induce a philosopher to entertain this love for death? It can be only
the hope of that happiness which he expects in another life; and that hope can
be founded only upon the opinion of the soul's immortality.

Socrates employed the last day of his life in entertaining his friends upon
this great and important subject; from which conversation, Plato's admirable
dialogue, entitled the Phaedon, is wholly taken. He explains to his friends all
the arguments for believing the soul immortal, and refutes all the objections
against it, which are very near the same as are made at this day.

When Socrates had done speaking, Crito desired him to give him, and the rest
of his friends, his last instructions in regard to his children and other
affairs, that by executing them they might have the consolation of doing him
some pleasure. I shall recommend nothing to you this day, replied Socrates,
more than I have already done, which is, to take care of yourselves. You cannot
do yourselves a greater service, nor do me and my family a greater pleasure.
Crito having asked him afterward in what manner he thought fit to be buried?
As you please, said Socrates, if you can lay hold of me, and I not escape out
of your hands. At the same time, looking on his friends with a smile, I can
never persuade Crito, that Socrates is he who converses with you, and disposes
the several parts of his discourse, for he always imagines that I am what he is
going to see dead in a little while; he confounds me with my carcass, and
therefore asks me how I would be interred. In finishing these words, he rose
up, and went to bathe himself in a chamber adjoining. After he came out of the
bath, his children were brought to him, for he had three, two very little, and
the other grown up. He spoke to them for some time, gave his orders to the
women who took care of them, and then dismissed them. Being returned into his
chamber, he laid himself down upon his bed.

The servant of the eleven entered at the same instant, and having informed him
that the time for drinking the hemlock was come, (which was at sunset) the
servant was so much afflicted with sorrow, that he turned his back and fell
a-weeping. See, said Socrates, the good heart of this man, since my
imprisonment he has often come to see me, and to converse with me; he is more
worthy than all his fellows: how heartily the poor man weeps for me. This is a
remarkable example, and might teach those in an office of this kind how they
ought to behave to all prisoners, but more especially to persons of merit, when
they are so unhappy to fall into their hands. The fatal cup was brought.
Socrates asked what it was necessary for him to do? Nothing more, replied the
servant, than as soon as you have drank off the draught, to walk about till you
find your legs grow weary, and afterward lie down upon your bed. He took the
cup without any emotion, or change in his color or countenance; and regarding
the man with a steady and assured look: "Well, said he, what say you of this
drink; may one make a libation out of it?" Upon being told that there was only
enough for one dose: "At least, continued he, we may say our prayers to the
gods, as it is our duty, and implore them to make our exit from this world, and
our last stage happy, which is what I most ardently beg of them." After having
spoke these words, he kept silence for some time, and then drank off the whole
draught with an amazing tranquillity and serenity of aspect not to be expressed
or conceived.

Till then his friends, with great violence to themselves, had refrained from
tears, but after he had drank the potion, they were no longer their own
masters, and wept abundantly. Apollodorus, who had been in tears during almost
the whole conversation, began then to raise great cries, and to lament with
such excessive grief, as pierced the hearts of all that were present. Socrates
alone remained unmoved, and even reproved his friends, though with his usual
mildness and good nature. "What are you doing? said he to them. I admire at
you! Oh! what is become of your virtue? Was it not for this I sent away the
women, that they might not fall into these weaknesses; for I have always heard
say that we ought to die peaceably, and blessing the gods. Be at ease, I beg
you, and show more constancy and resolution." He then obliged them to restrain
their tears.

In the mean time, he kept walking to and fro; and when he found his legs grow
weary, he laid down upon his back, as he had been directed.

The poison then operated more and more. When Socrates sound it began to gain
upon the heart, uncovering his face, which had been covered, without doubt to
prevent any thing from disturbing him in his last moments, "Crito, said he, we
owe a cock to Aesculapius; discharge that vow for me, and pray do not forget
it." Soon after which he breathed his last. Crito went to his body, and closed
his mouth and eyes. Such was the end of Socrates, in the first year of the
ninety-fifth Olympiad, and the seventieth of his age.

It was not till some time after the death of this great man, that the people
of Athens perceived their mistake, and began to repent of it; their hatred
being satisfied, their prejudices expired, and time having given them an
opportunity for reflection, the notorious injustice of the sentence appeared in
all its horrors. Nothing was heard throughout the city but discourses in favor
of Socrates. The Academy, the Lycaeum, private houses, public walks, and market
places, seemed still to reecho the sound of his loved voice. "Here, said they,
he formed our youth, and taught our children to love their country, and to
honor their parents. In this place he gave us his admirable lessons, and
sometimes made us seasonable reproaches, to engage us more warmly in the
pursuit of virtue. Alas! how have we rewarded him for such important services?"
Athens was in universal mourning and consternation. The schools were shut up,
and all exercises suspended. The accusers were called to account for the
innocent blood they had caused to be shed. Melitus was condemned to die, and
the rest banished. Plutarch observes, that all those who had any share in this
black calumny were in such abomination amongst the citizens, that no one would
give them fire, answer them any question, nor go into the same bath with them,
and had the place cleaned where they had had bathed, lest they should be
polluted by touching it, which drove them into such despair, that many of them
killed themselves.

The Athenians, not contented with having punished his accusers, caused a
statue of brass to be erected to him, of the workmanship of the celebrated
Lysippus, and placed it in one of the most conspicuous parts of the city. Their
respect and gratitude rose even to a religious veneration; they dedicated a
chapel to him, as to a hero and a demi-god, which they called the Chapel of
Socrates.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

