AN HISTORY OF THE EARTH, AND ANIMATED NATURE:

BY OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

VOL. VIII.

LONDON: Printed for J. NOURSE, in the STRAND, BOOKSELLER TO HIS MAJESTY.
MDCCLXXIV.

CONTENTS.
Of INSECTS. PART. III.
CHAP. I. OF Caterpillars in general Page 3 II. Of the Transformations of the
Caterpillar into its corresponding Butterfly, or Moth 7 III. Of Butterflies and
Moths. 32 IV. Of the Enemies of the Caterpillar, 43 V. Of the Silkworm 49
PART IV.
CHAP. I. Of the Fourth Order of Insects 63 II. Of the Be 65 III. Of the Wasp
and Hornet. 96 IV. Of the Ichnumon-Fly 111 V. Of the Ant. 115 VI. Of the
Beetle, and its Varieties 128 VII. Of the Gnat and the Tipula 151
PART V.
CHAP. VIII. Of Zoophytes in general 161 IX. Of Worms 166 X. Of the Star-Fish.
174 CHAP. XI. Of the Polypus 179 XII. Of Lithophytes and Sponges 192
AN HISTORY OF INSECTS. PART III.
AN HISTORY OF INSECTS.
CHAP. I. Of Caterpillars in General.
IF we take a cursory view of insects in general, caterpillars alone, and the
butterflies and moths they give birth to, will make a third part of the number.
Wherever we move, wherever we turn, these insects, in one shape or another,
present themselves to our view. Some, in every state, offer the most
entertaining spectacle; others are beautiful only in their winged form. Many
persons, of which number I am one, have an invincible aversion to caterpillars,
and worms of every species: there is something disagreeable in their slow
crawling motion, for which the variety of their coloring can never compensate.
But others feel no repugnance at observing, and even handling them with the
most attentive application.

There is nothing in the butterfly state, so beautiful or splendid as these
insects. They serve, not less than the birds themselves, to banish solitude
from our walks, and to fill up our idle intervals with the most pleasing
speculations. The butterfly makes one of the principal ornaments of oriental
poetry; but, in those countries, the insect is larger and more beautiful than
with us.

The beauties of the fly may therefore very well excite our curiosity to
examine the reptile. But we are still more strongly attached to this tribe,
from the usefulness of one of the number. The silkworm is, perhaps, the most
serviceable of all other animals; since, from its labors, and the manufacture
attending it, near a third part of the world are clothed, adorned, and
supported.

Caterpillars may be easily distinguished from worms or maggots, by the number
of their feet; and by their producing butterflies of moths. When the sun calls
up vegetation, and vivifies the various eggs of insects, the caterpillars are
the first that are seen, upon almost every vegetable and tree, eating its
leaves, and preparing for a state of greater perfection. They have feet both
before and behind; which not only enable them to move forward by a sort of
steps made by their fore and hinder parts, but also to climb up vegetables, and
to stretch themselves out from the boughs and stalks, to reach their food at a
distance. All of this class have from eight feet at the least, to sixteen; and
this may serve to distinguish them from the worm tribe, that never have so
many. The animal into which they are converted, is always a butterfly or a
moth; and these are always distinguished from other flies, by having their
wings covered over with a painted dust, which gives them such various beauty.
The wings of flies are transparent, as we see in the common flesh fly; while
those of beetles are hard, like horn: from such the wing of a butterfly may be
easily distinguished; and words would obscure their differences.

From hence it appears, that caterpillars, whether in the reptile state, or
advanced to their last state of perfection into butterflies, may easily be
distinguished from all other insects; being animals peculiarly formed, and also
of a peculiar nature. The transmutations they undergo, are also more numerous
than those of any insect hitherto mentioned; and, in consequence, they have
been placed in the third order of changes by Swammerdam, who has thrown such
lights upon this part of natural history. In the second order of changes,
mentioned before, we saw the grasshopper and the earwig, when excluded from the
egg, assume a form very like that which they were after to preserve; and seemed
arrived at a state of perfection, in all respects, except in not having wings;
which did not bud forth until they were come to maturity. But the insects of
this third order, that we are now about to describe, go through a much greater
variety of transformations: for, when they are excluded from the egg, they
assume the form of a small caterpillar, which feeds and grows larger every day,
often changing its skin, but still preserving its form. When the animal has
come to a certain magnitude in this state, it discontinues eating, makes itself
a covering or husk, in which it remains wrapped up, seemingly without life or
motion; and after having for some time continued in this state, it once more
bursts its confinement, and comes forth a beautiful butterfly. Thus we see this
animal put on no less than three different appearances, from the time it is
first excluded from the egg. It appears a crawling caterpillar; then an
insensible aurelia, as it is called, without life or motion; and lastly, a
butterfly, variously painted, according to its different kind. Having thus
distinguished this class of insects from all others, we will first survey their
history in general; and then enter particularly into the manners and nature of
a few of them, which most deserve our curiosity and attention.

CHAP. II. Of the Transformations of the Caterpillar into its corresponding
Butterfly or Moth.
WHEN winter has disrobed the trees of their leaves, Nature then seems to have
lost her insects. There are thousands of different kinds, with and without
wings; which, though swarming at other seasons, then entirely disappear. Our
fields are re-peopled, when the leaves begin to bud, by the genial influence of
spring; and caterpillars, of various sorts, are seen feeding upon the promise
of the year, even before the leaves are completely unfolded. Those
caterpillars, which we then see, may serve to give us a view of the general
means which Nature employs to preserve such a number of insects during that
season, when they can no longer find subsistence. It is known, by united
experience, that all these animals are hatched from the eggs of butterflies;
and those who observe them more closely, will find the fly very careful in
depositing its eggs in those places where they are likely to be hatched with
the greatest safety and success. During winter, therefore, the greatest number
of caterpillars are in an egg state; and in this lifeless situation, brave all
the rigours and the humidity of the climate: and though often exposed to all
its changes, still preserve the latent principles of life, which is more fully
exerted at the approach of spring. That same power that pushes forth the
budding leaf, and the opening flower, impels the insect into animation; and
Nature at once seems to furnish the guest and the banquet. When the insect has
found force to break its shell, it always finds its favorite aliments provided
in abundance before it.

But all caterpillars are not sent off from the egg in the beginning of spring;
for many of them have subsisted during the winter in their aurelia state: in
which, as we have briefly observed above, the animal is seemingly deprived of
life and motion. In this state of insensibility, many of these insects continue
during the rigours of winter; some enclosed in a kind of shell, which they have
spun for themselves at the end of autumn; some concealed under the bark of
trees; others in the chinks of old walls; and many buried under ground. From
all these, a variety of butterflies are seen to issue, in the beginning of
spring; and adorn the earliest part of the year with their painted flutterings.

Some caterpillars do not make any change whatsoever at the approach of winter;
but continue to live in their reptile state, through all the severity of the
season. These choose themselves some retreat, where they may remain undisturbed
for some months together; and there they remain, quite motionless, and as
insensible as if they were actually dead. Their constitution is such, that
food, at that time, would be useless; and the cold prevents their making those
dissipations which require restoration. In general, caterpillars of this kind
are found in great numbers together, enclosed in one common web, that covers
them all, and serves to protect them from the injuries of the air.

Lastly, there are some of the caterpillar kind, whose butterflies live all the
winter; and who, having fluttered about for some part of the latter end of
autumn, seek for some retreat during the winter, in order to answer the ends of
propagation, at the approach of spring. These are often found lifeless and
motionless in the hollows of trees, or the clefts of timber; but, by being
approached to the fire, they recover life and activity, and seem to anticipate
the desires of the spring.

In general, however, whether the animal has subsisted in an egg state, during
the winter; or whether as a butterfly, bred from an aurelia, in the beginning
of spring; or a butterfly that has subsisted during the winter, and lays eggs
as soon as the leaves of plants are shot forward, the whole swarm of
caterpillars are in motion to snare the banquet that Nature has provided. There
is scarce a plant that has not its own peculiar insects; and some are known to
support several of different kinds. Of these, many are hatched from the egg, at
the foot of the tree, and climb up to its leaves for subsistence: the eggs of
others, have been glued by the parent butterfly to the leaves; and they are no
sooner excluded from the shell, but they find themselves in the midst of plenty.

When the caterpillar first bursts from the egg, it is small and feeble; its
appetites are in proportion to its size, and it seems to make no great
consumption: but as it increases in magnitude, it improves in its appetites; so
that, in its adult caterpillar state, it is the most ravenous of all animals
whatsoever. A single caterpillar will eat double its own weight of leaves in a
day, and yet seems no way disordered by the meal. -- What would mankind do, if
their oxen or their horses were so voracious!

These voracious habits, with its slow crawling motion, but still more a
stinging like that of nettles, which follows upon handling the greatest number
of them, make these insects not the most agreeable objects of human curiosity.
However, there are many philosophers who have spent years in their
contemplation; and who have not only attended to their habits and labors, but
minutely examined their structure and internal conformation.

The body of the caterpillar, when anatomically considered, is found composed
of rings, whose circumference is pretty near circular or oval. They are
generally twelve in number, and are all membraneous; by which caterpillars may
be distinguished from many other insects, that nearly resemble them in form.
The head of the caterpillar is connected to the first ring by the neck; that is
generally so short and contracted, that it is scarce visible. All the covering
of the head in caterpillars seems to consist of a shell; and they have neither
upper nor under jaw, for they are both placed rather vertically, and each jaw
armed with a large thick tooth, which is singly equal to numbers. With these
the animals devour their food in such amazing quantities; and with these, some
of the kind defend themselves against their enemies. Though the mouth be kept
shut, the teeth are always uncovered; and while the insect is in health, they
are seldom without employment. Whatever the caterpillar devours, these teeth
serve to chop it into small pieces, and render the parts of the leaf fit for
swallowing. Many kinds, while they are yet young, eat only the succulent part
of the leaf, and leave all the fibers untouched; others, however, attack the
whole leaf, and eat it clean away. One may be amused, for a little time, in
observing the avidity with which they are seen to feed; some are seen eating
the whole day; others have their hours of repast; some choose the night, and
others the day. When the caterpillar attacks a leaf, it places its body in such
a manner that the edge of the leaf shall fall between its feet, which keeps it
steady, while the teeth are employed in cutting it: these fall upon the leaf,
somewhat in the manner of a pair of gardener's sheers; and every morsel is
swallowed as soon as cut. Some caterpillars feed upon leaves so very narrow,
that they are not broader than their mouths; in this case the animal is seen to
devour it from the point, as we would eat a radish.

As there are various kinds of caterpillars, the numbers of their feet are
various; some having eight, and some sixteen. Of these feet the six foremost
are covered with a sort of shining gristle; and are therefore called the shelly
legs. The hindmost feet, whatever be their number, are soft and flexible, and
are called membranaceous. Caterpillars also, with regard to their external
figure, are either smooth, or hairy. The skin of the first kind is soft to the
touch, or hard, like shagreen; the skin of the latter, is hairy, and as it were
thorny; and generally, if handled, stings like nettles. Some of them even cause
this stinging pain, if but approached too nearly.

Caterpillars, in general, have six small black spots placed on the
circumference of the fore ring, and a little to the side of the head. Three of
these are larger than the rest, and are unequal and transparent: these Reaumur
takes to be the eyes of the caterpillar; however, most of these reptiles have
very little occasion for sight, and seem only to be directed by their feeling.

But the parts of the caterpillar's body which most justly demand our
attention, are the stigmata, as they are called; or those holes on the sides of
its body, through which the animal is supposed to breathe. All along this
insect's body, on each side, these holes are easily discoverable. They are
eighteen in number, nine on a side, rather nearer the belly than the back; a
hole for every ring, of which the animal's body is composed, except the second,
the third, and the last. These oval openings may be considered as so many
mouths, through which the insect breathes; but with this difference, that as we
have but one pair of lungs, the caterpillar has no less than eighteen. It
requires no great anatomical dexterity to discover these lungs in the larger
kind of caterpillars: they appear, at first view, to be hollow cartilaginous
tubes, and of the color of mother-of-pearl. These tubes are often seen to
unite with each other; some are perceived to open into the intestines; and some
go to different parts of the surface of the body. That these vessels serve to
convey the air, appears evidently, from the famous experiment of Malpighi; who,
by stopping up the mouths of the stigmata with oil, quickly suffocated the
animal, which was seen to die convulsed the instant after. In order to
ascertain his theory, he rubbed oil upon other parts of the insect's body,
leaving the stigmata free; and this seemed to have no effect upon the animal's
health, but it continued to move and eat as usual: he rubbed oil on the
stigmata of one side, and the animal underwent a partial convulsion, but
recovered soon after. However, it ought to be observed, that air is not so
necessary to these as to the nobler ranks of animals, since caterpillars will
live in an exhausted receiver for several days together; and though they seem
dead at the bottom, yet, when taken out, recover, and resume their former
vivacity.

If the caterpillar be cut open longitudinally along the back, its intestines
will be perceived running directly in a straight line from the mouth to the
anus. They resemble a number of small bags opening into each other; and
strengthened on both sides by a fleshy cord, by which they are united. These
insects are, upon many occasions, seen to cast forth the internal coat of their
intestines with their food, in the changes which they so frequently undergo.
But the intestines take up but a small part of the animal's body, if compared
to the fatty substance in which they are involved. This substance changes its
color when the insect's metamorphosis begins to approach; and from white it is
usually seen to become yellow. If to these parts, we add the caterpillar's
implements for spinning, (for all caterpillars spin at one time or another) we
shall have a rude sketch of this animal's conformation: however, we shall
reserve the description of those parts, till we come to the history of the
silkworm, where the manner in which these insects spin their webs, will most
properly find place.

The life of a caterpillar seems one continued succession of changes; and it is
seen to throw off one skin only to assume another; which also is divested in
its turn: and thus for eight or ten times successively. We must not, however,
confound this changing of the skin with the great metamorphosis which it is
afterward to undergo. The throwing off one skin, and assuming another, seems,
in comparison, but a slight operation among these animals: this is but the work
of a day; the other is the great adventure of their lives. Indeed, this faculty
of changing the skin, is not peculiar to caterpillars only, but is common to
all the insect kind; and even to some animals that claim a higher rank in
nature. We have already seen the lobster and the crab out-growing their first
shells, and then bursting from their confinement, in order to assume a covering
more roomy and convenient. It is probable that the louse, the flea, and the
spider, change their covering from the same necessity; and growing too large
for the crust in which they have been for some time enclosed, burst it for
another. This period is probably that of their growth; for as soon as their new
skin is hardened round them, the animal's growth is necessarily circumscribed,
while it remains within it. With respect to caterpillars, many of them change
their skins five or six times in a season; and this covering, when cast off,
often seems so complete, that many might mistake the empty skin for the real
insect. Among the hairy caterpillars, for instance, the cast skin is covered
with hair; the feet, as well gristly as membraneous, remain fixed to it; even
the parts which nothing but a microscope can discover, are visible in it; in
short, all the parts of the head; not only the skull, but the teeth.

In proportion as the time approaches in which the caterpillar is to cast its
old skin, its colors become more feeble, the skin seems to wither and grow
dry, and in some measure resembles a leaf, when it is no longer supplied with
moisture from the stock. At that time, the insect begins to find itself under a
necessity of changing; and it is not effected without violent labor, and
perhaps pain. A day or two before the critical hour approaches, the insect
ceases to eat, loses its usual activity, and seems to rest immovable. It seeks
some place to remain in security; and no longer timorous, seems regardless even
of the touch. It is now and then seen to bend itself and elevate its back;
again it stretches to its utmost extent: it sometimes lifts up the head, and
then lets it fall again; it sometimes waves it three or four times from side to
side, and then remains in quiet. At length, some of within from the view; but
in others, where it is more transparent, the caterpillar, when it has done
spinning, strikes into it the claws of the two feet under the tail, and
afterward forces in the tail itself, by contracting those claws, and violently
striking the feet one against the other. If, however, they be taken from their
web at this time, they appear in a state of great languor; and, incapable of
walking, remain on that spot where they are placed. In this condition they
remain one or two days, preparing to change into an aurelia; somewhat in the
manner they made preparations for changing their skin. They then appear with
their bodies bent into a bow, which they now and then are seen to straiten:
they make no use of their legs; but if they attempt to change place, do it by
the contortions of their body. In proportion as their change into an aurelia
approaches, their body becomes more and more bent; while their extensions and
convulsive contractions become more frequent. The hinder end of the body is the
part which the animal first disengages from its caterpillar skin; that part of
the skin remains empty, while the body is drawn up contractedly toward the
head. In the same manner they disengage themselves from the two succeeding
rings; so (...) the animal is then lodged entirely in the fore part of its
caterpillar covering: that half which is abandoned, remains flacid and empty;
while the fore part, on the contrary, is swolen and distended. The animal,
having thus quitted the hinder part of its skin, to drive itself up into the
fore part, still continues to heave and work as before; so that the skull is
soon seen to burst into three pieces, and a longitudinal opening is made in the
three first rings of the body, through which the insect thrusts forth its naked
body, with strong efforts. Thus at last, it entirely gets free from its
caterpillar skin, and for ever forsakes its most odious reptile form.

The caterpillar, thus stripped of its skin for the last time, is now become an
aurelia; in which the parts of the future butterfly are all visible; but in so
soft a state, that the smallest touch can discompose them. The animal is now
become helpless and motionless; but only waits for the assistance of the air to
dry up the moisture on its surface, and supply it with a crust capable of
resisting external injuries. Immediately after being stripped of its
caterpillar skin, it is of a green color, especially in those parts which are
distended by an extraordinary afflux of animal moisture; but in ten or twelve
hours after being thus exposed, its parts harden, their glutinous silk, make a
kind of paste, in which they wrap themselves up. Many are the forms which these
animals assume in this helpless state; and it often happens, that the most
deformed butterflies issue from the most beautiful aurelias.

In general, however, the aurelia takes the rude outline of the parts of the
animal which is contained within it; but as to the various colors which it is
seen to assume, they are rather the effect of accident; for the same species of
insect does not at all times assume the same hue, when it becomes an aurelia.
In some, the beautiful gold color is at one time found; in others, it is
wanting. This brilliant hue, which does not fall short of the best gilding, is
formed in the same manner in which we see leather obtain a gold color, though
none of that metal ever enters into the tincture. It is only formed by a
beautiful brown varnish, laid upon a white ground; and the white thus gleaming
through the transparency of the brown, gives a charming golden yellow. These
two colors are found, one over the other, in the aurelia of the little animal
we are describing; and the whole appears gilded, without any real gilding.

The aurelia thus formed, and left to time to expand into a butterfly, in some
measure resembles an animal in an egg, that is to wait for external warmth to
hatch it into life and vigor. As the quantity of moisture that is enclosed
within the covering of the aurelia, continues to keep its body in the most
tender state, so it is requisite that this humidity should be dried away,
before the little butterfly can burst its prison. Many have been the
experiments to prove that nature may in this respect be assisted by art; and
that the life of the insect may be retarded or quickened, without doing it the
smallest injury. For this purpose, it is only requisite to continue the insect
in its aurelia state, by preventing the evaporation of its humidity; which will
consequently add some days, nay weeks, to its life: on the other hand, by
evaporating its moisture, in a warm situation, the animal assumes its winged
state before its usual time, and goes through the offices assigned its
existence. To prove this, Mr. Reaumur enclosed the aurelia in a glass tube; and
found the evaporated water, which exhaled from the body of the insect,
collected in drops at the bottom of the tube: he covered the aurelia with
varnish; and this making the evaporation more difficult and slow, the butterfly
was two months longer than its natural term, in coming out of its case: he
found, on the other hand, that by laying the animal in a warm room, he hastened
the disclosure of the butterfly; and by keeping it in an ice-house in the same
manner, he delayed it. Warmth acted, in this case, in a double capacity;
invigorating the animal, and evaporating the moisture.

The aurelia, though it bears a different external appearance, nevertheless
contains within it all the parts of the butterfly in perfect formation; and
lying each in a very orderly manner, though in the smallest compass. These,
however, are so fast and tender, that it is impossible to visit without
discomposing them. When either by warmth, or increasing vigor, the parts have
acquired the necessary force and solidity, the butterfly then seeks to
disembarrass itself of those bands which kept it so long in confinement. Some
insects continue under the form of an aurelia not above ten days; some twenty;
some several months; and even for a year together.

The butterfly, however, does not continue so long under the form of an
aurelia, as one would be apt to imagine. In general, those caterpillars that
provide hemselves with cones, continue within them but a few days after the
cone is completely finished. Some, however, remain buried in this artificial
covering for eight or nine months, without taking the smallest sustenance
during the whole time: and though in the caterpillar state no animals were so
voracious, when thus transformed, they appear a miracle of abstinence. In all,
sooner or later, the butterfly bursts from its prison; not only that natural
prison which is formed by the skin of the aurelia, but also from that
artificial one of silk, or any other substance in which it has enclosed itself.

The efforts which the butterfly makes to get free from its aurelia state, are
by no means so violent as those which the insect had in changing from the
caterpillar into the aurelia. The quantity of moisture surrounding the
butterfly is by no means so great as that attending its former change; and the
shell of the aurelia is so dry, that it may be cracked between the fingers.

If the animal be shut up within a cone, the butterfly always gets rid of the
natural internal skin of the aurelia, before it eats its way through the
external covering which its own industry has formed round it. In order to
observe the manner in which it thus gets rid of the aurelia covering, we must
cut open the cone, and then we shall have an opportunity of discovering the
insect's efforts to emancipate itself from its natural shell. When this
operation begins, there seems to be a violent agitation in the humors
contained within the little animal's body. Its fluids seem driven, by an hasty
fermentation, through all the vessels; while it labors violently with its
legs, and makes several other violent struggles to get free. As all these
motions concur with the growth of the insect's wings and body, it is impossible
that the brittle skin which covers it should longer resist: it at length gives
way, by bursting into four distinct and regular pieces. The skin of the head
and legs first separates; then the skin at the back flies open, and dividing
into two regular portions, disengages the back and wings: then there likewise
happens another rupture in that portion which covered the rings of the back of
the aurelia. After this, the butterfly, as if fatigued with its struggles,
remains very quiet for some time, with its wings pointed downwards, and its
legs fixed in the skin which it had just thrown off. At first sight the animal,
just set free, and permitted the future use of its wings, seems to want them
entirely: they take up such little room, that one would wonder where they were
hidden. But soon after, they expand so rapidly, that the eye can scarce attend
their unfolding. From reaching scarce half the length of the body, they
acquire, in a most wonderful manner, their full extent and bigness, so as to be
each five times larger than they were before. Nor is it the wings alone that
are thus increased: all their spots and paintings, before so minute as to be
scarce discernible, are proportionably extended; so that, what a few minutes
before seemed only a number of confused, unmeaning points, now become distinct
and most beautiful ornaments. Nor are the wings, when they are thus expanded,
unfolded in the manner in which earwigs and grasshoppers display theirs, who
unfurl them like a lady's fan: on the contrary, those of butterflies actually
grow to their natural size in this very short space. The wing, at the instant
it is freed from its late confinement, is considerably thicker than afterward;
so that it spreads in all its dimensions, growing thinner as it becomes
broader. If one of the wings be plucked from the animal just set free, it may
be spread by the fingers, and it will soon become as broad as the other, which
has been left behind. As the wings extend themselves so suddenly, they have not
yet had time to dry; and accordingly appear like pieces of wet paper, soft, and
full of wrinkles. In about half an hour, they are perfectly dry, their wrinkles
entirely disappear, and the little animal assumes all its splendour. The
transmutation being thus perfectly finished, the butterfly discharges three or
four drops of a blood-coloured liquid, which are the last remains of its
superfluous moisture. Those aurelias which are enclosed within a cone, find
their exit still more difficult, as they have still another prison to break
through: this, however, they perform in a short time; for the butterfly, freed
from its aurelia skin, butts with its head violently against the walls of its
artificial prison; and probably with its eyes, that are rough and like a file,
it rubs the internal surface away; till it is at last seen bursting its way
into open light; and, in less than a quarter of an hour, the animal acquires
its full perfection.

Thus, to use the words of Swammerdam, we see a little insignificant creature
distinguished, in its last birth, with qualifications and ornaments, which man,
during his stay upon earth, can never even hope to acquire. The butterfly, to
enjoy life, needs no other food but the dews of Heaven; and the honeyed juices
which are distilled from every flower. The pageantry of princes cannot equal
the ornaments with which it is invested; nor the rich coloring that
embellishes its wings. The skies are the butterfly's proper habitation, and the
air its element: whilst man comes into the world naked, and often roves about
without habitation or shelter; exposed, on one hand, to the heat of the sun;
and, on the other, to the damps and exhalations of the earth; both alike
enemies of his happiness and existence. -- A strong proof that, while this
little animal is raised to its greatest height, we are as yet, in this world,
only candidates for perfection!

CHAP. III. Of Butterflies and Moths.
IT has been already shown that all Butterflies are bred from caterpillars; and
we have exhibited the various circumstances of that surprising change. It has
been remarked, that butterflies may be easily distinguished from flies of every
other kind, by their wings; for, in others, they are either transparent, like
gauze, as we see in the common flesh fly; or they are hard and crusted, as we
see in the wings of the beetle. But in the butterfly, the wings are soft,
opake, and painted over with a beautiful dust, that comes off with handling.

The number of these beautiful animals is very great; and though Linnaeus has
reckoned up above seven hundred and sixty different kinds, the catalogue is
still very incomplete. Every collector of butterflies can show undescribed
species: and such as are fond of minute discovery, can here produce animals
that have been examined only by himself. In general, however, those of the warm
climates, are larger and more beautiful than such as are bred at home; and we
can easily admit the beauty of the butterfly, since we are thus freed from the
damage of the caterpillar. It has been the amusement of some to collect these
animals, from different parts of the world; or to breed them from caterpillars
at home. These they arrange in systematic order; or dispose so as to make
striking and agreeable pictures: and all must grant, that this specious
idleness is far preferable to that unhappy state which is produced by a total
want of employment.

The wings of butterflies, as was observed, fully distinguish them from flies
of every other kind. They are four in number; and though two of them be cut
off, the animal can fly with the two others remaining. They are, in their own
substance, transparent; but owe their opacity to the beautiful dust with which
they are covered; and which has been likened, by some naturalists, to the
feathers of birds; by others, to the scales of fishes; as their imaginations
were disposed to catch the resemblance. In fact, if we regard the wing of a
butterfly with a good microscope, we shall perceive it studded over with a
variety of little grains of different dimensions and forms, generally supported
upon a footstalk, regularly laid upon the whole surface. Nothing can exceed the
beautiful and regular arrangement of these little substances; which thus serve
to paint the butterfly's wing, like the tiles of an house. Those of one rank
are a little covered by those that follow: they are of many figures: on one
part of the wing may be seen a succession of oval studs; on another part, a
cluster of studs, each in the form of an heart: in one place they resemble a
hand open; and in another they are long or triangular; while all are
interspersed with taller studs, that grow between the rest, like mushrooms upon
a stalk. The wing itself is composed of several thick nerves, which render the
construction very strong, though light; and though it be covered over with
thousands of these scales or studs, yet its weight is very little increased by
the number. The animal is with ease enabled to support itself a long while in
air, although its flight be not very graceful. When it designs to fly to a
considerable distance, it ascends and descends alternately; going sometimes to
the right, sometimes to the left, without any apparent reason. Upon closer
examination, however, it will be found that it flies thus irregularly in
pursuit of its mate; and as dogs bait and quarter the ground in pursuit of
their game, so these insects traverse the air, in quest of their mates, whom
they can discover at more than a mile's distance.

If we prosecute our description of the butterfly, the animal may be divided
into three parts; the head, the corselet, and the body.

The body is the hinder part of the butterfly, and is composed of rings, which
are generally concealed under long hair, with which that part of the animal is
clothed. The corselet is more solid than the rest of the body, because the
fore wings, and the legs, are fixed therein. The legs are six in number,
although four only are made use of by the animal; the two fore legs being often
so much concealed in the long hair of the body, that it is sometimes difficult
to discover them. If we examine these parts internally, we shall find the same
set of vessels in the butterfly that we observed in the caterpillar, but with
this great difference; that as the blood, or humors, in the caterpillar,
circulated from the tail to the head, they are found, in the butterfly, to take
a direct contrary course, and to circulate from the head to the tail; so that
the caterpillar may be considered as the embryo animal, in which, as we have
formerly seen, the circulation is carried on differently from what it is in
animals when excluded.

But leaving the other parts of the butterfly, let us turn our attention
particularly to the head. The eyes of butterflies have not all the same form;
for, in some they are large, in others small; in some they are the larger
portion of a sphere, in others they are but a small part of it, and just
appearing from the head. In all of them, however, the outward coat has a
luster, in which may be discovered the various colors of the rainbow. When
examined a little closely, it will be found to have the appearance of a
multiplying glass; having a great number of sides, or facets, in the manner of
a brilliant cut diamond. In this particular, the eye of the butterfly, and of
most other insects, entirely correspond; and Luenhoek pretends, there are above
six thousand facets on the cornea of a flea. These animals, therefore, see not
only with great clearness; but view every object multiplied in a surprising
manner. Puget adapted the cornea of a fly in such a position, as to see objects
through it by the means of a microscope; and nothing could exceed the
strangeness of its representations: a soldier, who was seen through it,
appeared like an army of pigmies; for while it multiplied, it also diminished
the object: the arch of a bridge exhibited a spectacle more magnificent than
human skill could perform; the flame of a candle seemed a beautiful
illumination. It still, however, remains a doubt, whether the insect sees
objects singly, as with one eye; or whether every facet is itself a complete
eye, exhibiting its own object distinct from all the rest.

Butterflies, as well as most other flying insects, have two instruments, like
horns, on their heads, which are commonly called feelers. They differ from the
horns of greater animals, in being moveable at their base; and in having a
great number of joints, by which means the insect is enabled to turn them in
every direction. Those of butterflies are placed at the top of the head, pretty
near the external edge of each eye. What the use of these instruments may be,
which are thus formed with so much art, and by a Workman who does nothing
without reason, is as yet unknown to man. They may serve to guard the eye; they
may be of use to clean it; or they may be the organ of some sense which we are
ignorant of: but this is only explaining one difficulty by another.

We are not so ignorant of the uses of the trunk, which few insects of the
butterfly kind are without. This instrument is placed exactly between the eyes;
and when the animal is not employed in seeking its nourishment, it is rolled
up, like a curl. A butterfly, when it is feeding, flies round some flower, and
settles upon it. The trunk is then uncurled, and thrust out either wholly or in
part; and is employed in searching the flower to its very bottom, let it be
never so deep. This search being repeated seven or eight times, the butterfly
then passes to another; and continues to hover over those agreeable to its
taste, like a bird over its prey. This trunk consists of two equal hollow
tubes, nicely joined to each other, like the pipes of an organ.

Such is the figure and conformation of these beautiful insects, that cheer our
walks, and give us the earliest intimations of summer. But it is not by day
alone that they are seen fluttering wantonly from flower to flower, as the
greatest number of them fly by night, and expand the most beautiful coloring,
at those hours when there is no spectator. This tribe of insects has therefore
been divided into Diurnal and Nocturnal Flies; or, more properly speaking, into
Butterflies and Moths: the one only flying by day, the other most usually on
the wing in the night. They may be easily distinguished from each other, by
their horns or feelers: those of the butterfly being clubbed, or knobbed at the
end; those of the moth, tapering finer and finer to a point. To express it
technically -- the feelers of butterflies are clavated; those of moths, are
filiform.

The butterflies, as well as the moths, employ the short life assigned them, in
a variety of enjoyments. Their whole time is spent either in quest of food,
which every flower offers; or in pursuit of the female, whose approach they can
often perceive at above two miles distance. Their sagacity in this particular
is not less astonishing than true; but by what sense they are thus capable of
distinguishing each other at such distances, is not easy to conceive. It cannot
be by the sight, since such small objects as they are must be utterly
imperceptible, at half the distance at which they perceive each other: it can
scarcely be by the sense of smelling, since the animal has no organs for that
purpose. Whatever be their powers of perception, certain it is, that the male,
after having fluttered, as if carelessly, about for some time, is seen to take
wing, and go forward, sometimes for two miles together, in a direct line to
where the female is perched on a flower.

The general rule among insects is, that the female is larger than the male;
and this obtains particularly in the tribe I am describing. The body of the
male is smaller and slenderer; that of the female, more thick and oval.
Previous to the junction of these animals, they are seen sporting in the air,
pursuing and flying from each other, and preparing, by a mock combat, for the
more important business of their lives. If they be disturbed while united, the
female flies off with the male on her back, who seems entirely passive upon the
occasion.

But the females of many moths and butterflies seem to have assumed their airy
form for no other reason but to fecundate their eggs, and lay them. They are
not seen fluttering about in quest of food, or a mate: all that passes, during
their short lives, is a junction with the male of about half an hour; after
which they deposite their eggs, and die, without taking any nourishment, or
seeking any. It may be observed, however, that in all the females of this
tribe, they are impregnated by the male by one aperture, and lay their eggs by
another.

The eggs of female butterflies are disposed in the body like a bed of
chaplets; which, when excluded, are usually oval, and of a whitish color:
some, however, are quite round; and others flatted, like a turnip. The covering
or shell of the egg, though solid, is thin and transparent; and in proportion
as the caterpillar grows within the egg, the colors change, and are
distributed differently. The butterfly seems very well instructed by nature in
its choice of the plant, or the leaf, where it shall deposite its burden. Each
egg contains but one caterpillar; and it is requisite that this little animal,
when excluded, should be near its peculiar provision. The butterfly, therefore,
is careful to place her brood only upon those plants that afford good
nourishment to its posterity. Though the little winged animal has been fed
itself upon dew, or the honey of flowers, yet it makes choice for its young of
a very different provision, and lays its eggs on the most unsavory plants; the
ragweed, the cabbage, or the nettle. Thus every butterfly chooses not the plant
most grateful to it in its winged state; but such as it has fed upon in its
reptile form.

All the eggs of butterflies are attached to the leaves of the favorite plant,
by a sort of size or glue; where they continue, unobserved, unless carefully
sought after. The eggs are sometimes placed round the tender shoots of plants,
in the form of bracelets, consisting of above two hundred in each, and
generally surrounding the shoot, like a ring upon a finger. Some butterflies
secure their eggs from the injuries of air, by covering them with hair, plucked
from their own bodies, as birds sometimes are seen to make their nests; so that
their eggs are thus kept warm, and also entirely concealed.

All the tribe of female moths lay their eggs a short time after they leave the
aurelia; but there are many butterflies that flutter about the whole summer,
and do not think of laying, till the winter begins to warn them of their
approaching end: some even continue the whole winter in the hollows of trees,
and do not provide for posterity until the beginning of April, when they leave
their retreats, deposite their eggs, and die. Their eggs soon begin to feel the
genial influence of the season: the little animals burst from them in their
caterpillar state, to become aurelias, and butterflies in their turn; and thus
to continue the round of nature.

CHAP. IV. Of the Enemies of the Caterpillar.
NATURE, though it has rendered some animals surprizingly fruitful, yet ever
takes care to prevent their too great increase. One set of creatures is
generally opposed to another: and those are chiefly the most prolific, that
are, from their imbecility, incapable of making any effectual defense. The
caterpillar has perhaps, of all other animals, the greatest number of enemies;
and seems only to exist, by its surprising fecundity. Some animals devour them
by hundreds; others, more minute, yet more dangerous, mangle them in various
ways: so that, how great soever their numbers may be, their destroyers are in
equal proportion. Indeed, if we consider the mischiefs these reptiles are
capable of occasioning, and the various damages we sustain from their
insatiable rapacity, it is happy for the other ranks of nature, that there are
thousands of fishes, birds, and even insects, that live chiefly upon
caterpillars, and make them their most favorite repast.

When we described the little birds that live in our gardens, and near our
houses, as destructive neighbors, sufficient attention was not paid to the
services which they are frequently found to render us. It has been proved, that
a single sparrow and its mate, that have young ones, destroy above three
thousand caterpillars in a week; not to mention several butterflies, in which
numberless caterpillars are destroyed in embryo. It is in pursuit of these
reptiles that we are favored with the visits of many of our most beautiful
songsters; that amuse us during their continuance, and leave us when the
caterpillars disappear.

The maxim which has often been urged against man, that he, of all other
animals, is the only creature that is an enemy to his own kind, and that the
human species only are found to destroy each other, has been adopted, by
persons who never considered the history of insects. Some of the caterpillar
kind in particular, that seem fitted only to live upon leaves and plants, will,
however, eat each other; and the strongest will devour the weak, in preference
to their vegetable food. That which lives upon the oak, is found to seize any
of its companions, which it conveniently can, by the first rings, and inflict a
deadly wound: it then feasts in tranquillity on its prey, and leaves nothing of
the animal but the husk.

But it is not from each other they have most to fear, as in general they are
inoffensive; and many of this tribe are found to live in a kind of society.
Many kinds of flies lay their eggs either upon, or within their bodies; and as
these turn into worms, the caterpillar is seen to nourish a set of intestine
enemies within its body, that must shortly be its destruction: Nature having
taught flies, as well as all other animals, the surest methods of perpetuating
their kind. "Toward the end of August," says Reaumur, "I perceived a little
fly, of a beautiful gold color, busily employed in the body of a large
caterpillar, of that kind which feeds upon cabbage. I gently separated that
part of the leaf on which these insects were placed, from the rest of the
plant, and placed it where I might observe them more at my ease. The fly,
wholly taken up by the business in which it was employed, walked along the
caterpillar's body, now and then remaining fixed to a particular spot. Upon
this occasion, I perceived it every now and then dart a sting, which it carried
at the end of its tail, into the caterpillar's body, and then drew it out
again, to repeat the same operation in another place. It was not difficult for
me to conjecture the business which engaged this animal so earnestly; its whole
aim was to deposite its eggs in the caterpillar's body; which was to serve as a
proper retreat for bringing them to perfection. The reptile thus rudely
treated, seemed to bear all very patiently, only moving a little when stung too
deeply; which, however, the fly seemed entirely to disregard. I took particular
care to feed this caterpillar; which seemed to me to continue as voracious and
vigorous as any of the rest of its kind. In about ten or twelve days, it
changed into an aurelia, which seemed gradually to decline, and died: upon
examining its internal parts, the animal was entirely devoured by worms; which,
however, did not come to perfection, as it is probable they had not enough to
sustain them within."

What the French philosopher perceived upon this occasion, is every day to be
seen in several of the larger kinds of caterpillars, whose bodies serve as a
nest to various flies, that very carefully deposite their eggs within them. The
large cabbage caterpillar is so subject to its injuries, that, at certain
seasons, it is much easier to find them with than without them. The ichnumon
fly, as it is called, particularly infests these reptiles, and prevents their
fecundity. This fly is, of all others, the most formidable to insects of
various kinds. The spider, that destroys the ant, the moth, and the butterfly,
yet often falls a prey to the ichnumon; who pursues the robber to his retreat,
and, despising his nets, tears him in pieces, in the very labyrinth he has
made. This insect, as redoubtable as the little quadrupede that destroys the
crocodile, has received the same name; and from its destruction of the
caterpillar tribe, is probably more serviceable to mankind. This insect, I say,
makes the body of the caterpillar the place for depositing its eggs; to the
number of ten, fifteen, or twenty. As they are laid in those parts which are
not mortal, the reptile still continues to live, and to feed, showing no signs
of being incommoded by its new guests. The caterpillar changes its skin; and
sometimes undergoes the great change into an aurelia: but still the fatal
intruders work within, and secretly devour its internal substance: soon after
they are seen bursting through its skin, and moving away, in order to spin
themselves a covering, previous to their own little transformation. It is
indeed astonishing sometimes to see the number of worms, and those pretty
large, that thus issue from the body of a single caterpillar, and eat their way
through its skin: but it is more extraordinary still, that they should remain
within the body, devouring its entrails, without destroying its life. The truth
is, they seem instructed by nature not to devour its vital parts; for they are
found to feed only upon that fatty substance which composes the largest part of
the caterpillar's body. When this surprising appearance was first observed, it
was supposed that the animal thus gave birth to a number of flies, different
from itself; and that the same caterpillar sometimes bred an ichnumon, and
sometimes a butterfly: but it was not till after more careful inspection, it
was discovered, that the ichnumon tribe were not the caterpillar's offspring,
but its murderers.

CHAP. V. Of the Silkworm.
HAVING mentioned, in the last chapter, the damages inflicted by the
caterpillar tribe, we now come to an animal of this kind, that alone
compensates for all the mischief occasioned by the rest. This little creature,
which only works for itself, has been made of the utmost service to man; and
furnishes him with a covering more beautiful than any other animal can supply.
We may declaim indeed against the luxuries of the times, when silk is so
generally worn; but were such garments to fail, what other arts could supply
their deficiency?

Though silk was anciently brought in small quantities to Rome, yet it was so
scarce as to be sold for its weight in gold; and was considered as such a
luxurious refinement in dress, that it was infamous for a man to appear in
habits of which silk formed but half the composition. It was most probably
brought among them from the remotest parts of the east; since it was, at the
time of which I am speaking, scarcely known even in Persia.

Nothing can be more remote from the truth, than the manner in which their
historians describe the animal by which silk is produced. Pausanias informs us,
that silk came from the country of the Seres, a people of Asiatic Scythia; in
which place an insect, as large as the beetle, but in every other respect
resembling a spider, was bred up for that purpose. They take great care, as he
assures us, to feed and defend it from the weather; as well during the summer's
heat, as the rigours of winter. This insect, he observes, makes its web with
its feet, of which it has eight in number. It is fed, for the space of four
years, upon a kind of paste, prepared for it; and at the beginning of the
fifth, it is supplied with the leaves of the green willow, of which it is
particularly fond. It then feeds till it bursts with fat; after which they take
out its bowels, which are spun into the beautiful manufacture so scarce and
costly.

The real history of this animal was unknown among the Romans till the times of
Justinian; and it is supposed, that silkworms were not brought into Europe till
the beginning of the twelfth century; when Roger of Sicily, brought workmen in
this manufacture from Asia Minor, after his return from his expedition to the
Holy Land, and settled them in Sicily and Calabria. From these the other
kingdoms of Europe learned this manufacture; and it is now one of the most
lucrative carried on among the southern provinces of Europe.

The silkworm is now very well known to be a large caterpillar, of a whitish
color, with twelve feet, and producing a butterfly of the moth kind. The cone
on which it spins, is formed for covering it while it continues in the aurelia
state; and several of these, properly wound off, and united together, form
those strong and beautiful threads, which is woven into silk. The feeding these
worms, the gathering, the winding, the twisting, and the weaving their silk, is
one of the principal manufactures of Europe; and, as our luxuries increase,
seems every day to become more and more necessary to human happiness.

There are two methods of breeding silkworms; for they may be left to grow, and
remain at liberty upon the trees where they are hatched; or they may be kept in
a place built for that purpose, and fed every day with fresh leaves. The first
method is used in China, Tonquin, and other hot countries; the other is used in
those places where the animal has been artificially propagated, and still
continues a stranger. In the warm climates, the silkworm proceeds from an egg,
which has been glued by the parent moth upon proper parts of the mulberry-tree,
and which remains in that situation during the winter. The manner in which they
are situated and fixed to the tree, keeps them unaffected by the influence of
the weather; so that those frosts which are severe enough to kill the tree,
have no power to injure the silkworm.

The insect never proceeds from the egg till Nature has provided it a
sufficient supply; and till the budding leaves are furnished, in sufficient
abundance, for its support. When the leaves are put forth, the worms seem to
feel the genial summons, and bursting from their little eggs, crawl upon the
leaves, where they feed with a most voracious appetite. Thus they become larger
by degrees; and after some months feeding, they lay, upon every leaf, small
bundles, or cones of silk, which appear like so many golden apples, painted on
a fine green ground. Such is the method of breeding them in the East; and
without doubt it is best for the worms, and least troublesome for the feeder of
them. But it is otherwise in our colder European climates; the frequent changes
of the weather, and the heavy dews of our evenings, render the keeping them all
night exposed, subject to so many inconveniences, as to admit of no remedy, It
is true, that by the assistance of nets, they may be preserved from the insults
of birds; but the severe cold weather, which often succeeds the first heats of
summer, as well as the rain and high winds, will destroy them all: and,
therefore, to breed them in Europe, they must be sheltered and protected from
every external injury.

For this purpose, a room is chosen, with a south aspect; and the windows are
so well glazed, as not to admit the least air: the walls are well built, and
the planks of the floor exceeding close, so as to admit neither birds nor mice,
nor even so much as an insect. In the middle there should be four pillars
erected, or four wooden posts, so placed as to form a pretty large square.
Between these are different stories made with ozier hurdles; and under each
hurdle there should be a floor, with an upright border all round. These hurdles
and floors must hang upon pullies, so as to be placed, or taken down at
pleasure.

When the worms are hatched, some tender mulberry leaves are provided, and
placed in the cloth or paper box in which the eggs were laid, and which are
large enough to hold a great number. When they have acquired some strength,
they must be distributed on beds of mulberry leaves, in the different stories
of the square in the middle of the room, round which a person may freely pass
on every side. They will fix themselves to the leaves, and afterward to the
sticks of the hurdles, when the leaves are devoured. They have then a thread,
by which they can suspend themselves on occasion, to prevent any shock by a
fall; but this is by no means to be considered as the silk which they spin
afterward in such abundance. Care must be taken that fresh leaves be brought
every morning, which must be strewed very gently and equally over them; upon
which the silkworms will forsake the remainder of the old leaves, which must be
carefully taken away, and every thing kept very clean; for nothing hurts these
insects so much as moisture and uncleanliness. For this reason their leaves
must be gathered when the weather is dry, and kept in a dry place, if it be
necessary to lay in a store. As these animals have but a short time to live,
they make use of every moment, and almost continually are spinning, except at
those intervals when they change their skins. If mulberry leaves be difficult
to be obtained, the leaves of lettuce or holyoak will sustain them: but they do
not thrive so well upon their new diet; and their silk will neither be so
copious, nor of so good a quality.

Though the judicious choice, and careful management of their diet, is
absolutely necessary, yet there is another precaution of equal importance,
which is to give them air, and open their chamber windows, at such times as the
sun shines warmest. The place also must be kept as clean as possible; not only
the several floors that are laid to receive their ordure, but the whole
apartments in general. These things well observed, contribute greatly to their
health and increase.

The worm, at the the time it bursts the shell, is extremely small, and of a
black color; but the head is of a more shining black than the rest of the
body: some days after, they begin to turn whitish, or of an ash-colored gray.
After the skin begins to grow too rigid, or he animal is stinted within it, the
insect throws it off, and appears clothed anew: it then becomes larger and
much whiter, though it has a greenish cast: after some days, which are more or
less, according to the different heat of the climate, or to the quality of the
food, it leaves off eating, and seems to sleep for two days together: then it
begins to stir, and put itself into violent motions, till the skin falls off
the second time, and is thrown aside by the animal's feet. All these changes
are made in three weeks may easily be observed is, that it is composed
externally of a kind of rough cotton-like substance, which is called floss;
within the thread is more distinct and even; and next the body of the aurelia,
the apartment seems lined with a substance of the hardness of paper, but of a
much stronger consistence. It must not be supposed, that the thread which goes
to compose the cone, is rolled round, as we roll a bottom; on the contrary, it
lies upon it in a very irregular manner, and winds off now from one side of the
cone, and then from the other. This whole thread, if measured, will be found
about three hundred yards long; and so very fine, that eight or ten of them are
generally rolled off into one by the manufacturers. The cone, when completed,
is in form like a pidgeon's egg, and more pointed at one end than the other; at
the smaller end, the head of the aurelia is generally found; and this is the
place that the insect, when converted into a moth, is generally seen to burst
through.

It is generally a fortnight or three weeks before the aurelia is changed into
a moth; but no sooner is the winged insect completely formed, than having
divested itself of its aurelia skin, it prepares to burst through its cone, or
outward prison: for this purpose it extends its head toward the point of the
cone, butts with its eyes, which are rough, against the lining of its cell,
wears it away, and at last pushes forward, through a passage which is small at
first, but which enlarges as the animal increases its efforts for emancipation;
while the tattered remnants of its aurelia skin lie in confusion within the
cone, like a bundle of dirty linen.

The animal, when thus set free from its double confinement, appears exhausted
with fatigue, and seems produced for no other purpose but to transmit a future
brood. It neither flies nor eats; the male only seeking the female, whose eggs
he impregnates; and their union continues for four days, without interruption.
The male dies immediately after separation from his mate; and she survives him
only till she has laid her eggs, which are not hatched into worms till the
ensuing spring.

However, there are few of these animals suffered to come to a state of
maturity; for as their bursting through the cone destroys the silk, the
manufacturers take care to kill the aurelia, by exposing it to the sun, before
the moth comes to perfection. This done, they take off the floss, and throw the
cones into warm water, stirring them till the first thread offers them a clue
for winding all off. They generally take eight of the silken threads together;
the cones still kept under water, till a proper quantity of the silk is wound
off: however, they do not take all; for the latter parts grow weak, and are of
a bad color. As to the paper-like substance which remains, some stain it with
a variety of colors, to make artificial flowers; others let it lie in the
water, till the glutinous matter which cements it is all dissolved: it is then
carded like wool, spun with a wheel, and converted into silk stuffs of an
inferior kind.

PART IV.
CHAP. I. Of the Fourth Order of Insects.
IN the foregoing part we treated of caterpillars changing into butterflies; in
the present will be given the history of grubs changing into their
corresponding winged animals. These, like the former, undergo their
transformation, and appear as grubs or maggots, as aurelias, and at last as
winged insects. Like the former, they are bred from eggs; they feed in their
reptile state; they continue motionless and lifeless, as aurelias; and fly and
propagate, when furnished with wings. But they differ in many respects: the
grub or maggot wants the number of feet which the caterpillar is seen to have;
the aurelia is not so totally wrapped up, but that its feet and its wings
appear. The perfect animal, when emancipated, also has its wings either cased,
or transparent, like gauze; not colored with that beautifully painted dust
which adorns the wings of the butterfly.

In this class of insects, therefore, we may place a various tribe, that are
first laid as eggs, then are excluded as maggots or grubs, then change into
aurelias, with their legs and wings not wrapped up, but appearing; and lastly,
assuming wings, in which state they propagate their kind. Some of these have
four transparent wings, as bees; some have two membranous cases to their wings,
as beetles; and some have but two wings, which are transparent, as ants. Here,
therefore, we will place the be, the wasp, the humble be, the ichnumon fly,
the gnat, the tipula or longlegs, the bettle, the may-bug, the glowworm, and
the ant. The transformations which all these undergo, are pretty nearly
similar; and though very different animals in form, are yet produced nearly in
the same manner.

CHAP. II. Of the Be.
TO give a complete history of this insect in a few pages, which some have
exhausted volumes in describing, and whose nature and properties still continue
in dispute, is impossible. It will be sufficient to give a general idea of the
animal's operations; which, though they have been studied for more than two
thousand years, are still but incompletely known. The account given us by
Reaumur is sufficiently minute; and, if true, sufficiently wonderful: but I
find many of the facts which he relates, doubted by those who are most
conversant with bees; and some of them actually declared not to have a real
existence in nature.

It is unhappy, therefore, for those whose method demands an history of bees,
that they are unfurnished with those materials which have induced so many
observers to contradict so great a naturalist. His life was spent in the
contemplation; and it requires an equal share of attention, to prove the error
of his discoveries. Without entering, therefore, into the di^pute, I will take
him for my guide; and just mention, as I go along, those particulars in which
succeeding observers have begun to think him erroneous. Which of the two are
right, time only can discover; for my part I have only heard one side, for as
yet none have been so bold as openly to oppose Reaumur's delightful researches.

There are three different kinds of bees in every hive. First, the laboring
bees, which make up the far greatest number, and are thought to be neither male
or female, but merely born for the purposes of labor, and continuing the
breed, by supplying the young with provision, while yet in their helpless
state. The second sort are the drones; they are of a darker color, longer, and
more thick by one third than the former: they are supposed to be the males; and
there is not above a hundred of them, in a hive of seven or eight thousand
bees. The third sort is much larger than either of the former, and still fewer
in number: some assert, that there is not above one in every swarm; but this
later observers affirm not to be true, there being sometimes five or six in the
same hive. These are called queen bees, and are said to lay all the eggs from
which the whole swarm is hatched in a season.

In examining the structure of the common working be, the first remarkable
part that offers is the trunk, which serves to extract the honey from flowers.
It is not formed, like that of other flies, in the manner of a tube, by which
the fluid is to be sucked up; but like a besom, to sweep, or a tongue, to lick
it away. The animal is furnished also with teeth, which serve it in making wax.
This substance is gathered from flowers, like honey; it consists of that dust
or farina which contribute to the fecundation of plants, and is molded into wax
by the little animal, at leisure. Every be, when it leaves the hive to collect
this precious store, enters into the cup of the flower, particularly such as
seem charged with the greatest quantities of this yellow farina. As the
animal's body is covered over with hair, it rolls itself within the flower, and
soon becomes quite covered with the dust, which it soon after brushes off with
its two hind legs, and kneads into two little balls. In the thighs of the hind
legs there are two cavities, edged with hair; and into these, as into a basket,
the animal sticks its pellets. Thus employed, the be flies from flower to
flower, increasing its store, and adding to its stock of wax; until the ball,
upon each thigh, becomes as big as a grain of pepper: by this time, having got
a sufficient load, it returns, making the best of its way to the hive.

The belly of the be is divided into six rings, which sometime shorten the
body, by slipping one over the other. It contains within it, beside the
intestines, the honey-bag, the venom-bag, and the sting. The honey-bag is as
transparent as crystal, containing the honey that the be has brushed from the
flowers; of which the greater part is carried to the hive, and poured into the
cells of the honeycomb; while the remainder serves for the bee's own
nourishment: for, during summer, it never touches what has been laid up for the
winter. The sting, which serves to defend this little animal from its enemies,
is composed of three parts; the sheath, and two darts, which are extremely
small and penetrating. Both the darts have several small points or barbs, like
those of a fish-hook, which renders the sting more painful, and makes the darts
rankle in the wound. Still, however, this instrument would be very slight, did
not the be poison the wound. The sheath, which has a sharp point, makes the
first impression; which is followed by that of the darts, and then the venomous
liquor is poured in. The sheath sometimes sticks so fast in the wound, that the
animal is obliged to leave it behind; by which the be soon after dies, and the
wound is considerably enflamed. It might at first appear well for mankind, if
the be were without its sting; but, upon recollection, it will be found, that
the little animal would then have too many rivals in sharing its labors. An
hundred other lazy animals, fond of honey, and hating labor, would intrude
upon the sweets of the hive; and the treasure would be carried off, for want of
armed guardians to protect it.

From examining the be singly, we now come to consider it in society, as an
animal not only subject to laws, but active, vigilant, laborious, and
disinterested. All its provisions are laid up for the community; and all its
arts in building a cell, designed for the benefit of posterity. The substance
with which bees build their cells is wax; which is fashioned into convenient
apartments for themselves and their young. When they begin to work in their
hives, they divide themselves into four companies: one of which roves in the
fields in search of materials; another employs itself in laying out the bottom
and partitions of their cells; a third is employed in making the inside smooth
from the corners and angles; and the fourth company bring food for the rest, or
relieve those who return with their respective burdens. But they are not kept
constant to one employment; they often change the tasks assigned them: those
that have been at work, being permitted to go abroad; and those that have been
in the fields already, take their places. They seem even to have signs, by
which they understand each other; for when any of them want food, it bends down
its trunk to the be from whom it is expected, which then opens its honey-bag,
and lets some drops fall into the other's mouth, which is at that time opened
to receive it. Their diligence and labor is so great, that, in a day's time,
they are able to make cells, which lie upon each other numerous enough to
contain three thousand bees.

If we examine their cells, they will be found formed in the exactest
proportion. It was said by Pappus, an ancient geometrician, that, of all other
figures, hexagons were the most convenient; for, when placed touching each
other, the most convenient room would be given, and the smallest lost. The
cells of the bees are perfect hexagons: these, in every honeycomb, are double,
opening on either side, and closed at the bottom. The bottoms are composed of
little triangular panes, which, when united together, terminate in a point, and
lie exactly upon the extremities of other panes of the same shape, in opposite
cells. These lodgings have spaces, like streets, between them, large enough to
give the bees a free passage in and out; and yet narrow enough to preserve the
necessary heat. The mouth of every cell is defended by a border, which makes
the door a little less than the inside of the cell, which serves to strengthen
the whole. These cells serve for different purposes: for laying up their young;
for their wax, which in winter becomes a part of their food; and for their
honey, which makes their principal subsistence.

It is well known that the habitation of bees ought to be very close; and what
their hives want, from the negligence or unskilfulness of man, these animals
supply by their own industry: so that it is their principal care, when first
hived, to stop up all the crannies. For this purpose they make use of a
resinous gum, which is more tenacious than wax, and differs greatly from it.
This the ancients called Propolis: it will grow considerably hard in June;
though it will in some measure soften by heat; and is often found different in
consistence, color and smell. It has generally an agreeable aromatic odor
when it is warmed; and by some it is considered as a most grateful perfume.
When the bees begin to work with it, it is soft, but it acquires a firmer
consistence every day; till at length it assumes a brown color, and becomes
much harder than wax. The bees carry it on their hinder legs; and some think it
is met with on the birch, the willow, and poplar. However it is procured, it is
certain that they plaster the inside of their hives with this composition.

If examined through a glass hive, from the hurry the whole swarm is in, the
whole at first appears like anarchy and confusion: but the spectator soon finds
every animal diligently employed, and following one pursuit, with a settled
purpose. Their teeth are the instruments by which they model and fashion their
various buildings, and give them such symmetry and perfection. They begin at
the top of the hive; and several of them work at a time, at the cells which
have two faces. If they are stinted with regard to time, they give the new
cells but half the depth which they ought to have; leaving them imperfect, till
they have sketched out the number of cells necessary for the present occasion.
The construction of their combs, costs them a great deal of labor: they are
made by insensible additions; and not cast at once in a mold, as some are apt
to imagine. There seems no end of their shaping, finishing, and turning them
neatly up. The cells for their young are most carefully formed; those designed
for lodging the drones, are larger than the rest; and that for the queen-bee,
the largest of all. The cells in which the young brood are lodged, serve at
different times for containing honey; and this proceeds from an obvious cause:
every worm, before it is transformed into an aurelia, hangs its old skin on the
partitions of its cell; and thus, while it strengthens the wall, diminishes the
capacity of its late apartment. The same cell, in a single summer, is often
tenanted by three or four worms in succession; and the next season, by three or
four more. Each worm takes particular care to fortify the pannels of its cell,
by hanging up its spoils there: thus, the partitions being lined, six or eight
deep, become at last too narrow for a new brood, and are converted into
storehouses, for honey.

Those cells where nothing but honey is deposited, are much deeper than the
rest. When the harvest of honey is so plentiful that they have not sufficient
room for it, they either lengthen their combs, or build more; which are much
longer than the former. Sometimes they work at three combs at a time; for, when
there are three workhouses, more bees may be thus employed, without
embarrassing each other.

But honey, as was before observed, is not the only food upon which these
animals subsist. The meal of flowers, of which their wax is formed, is one of
their most favorite repasts. This is a diet which they live upon during the
summer; and of which they lay up a large winter provision. The wax of which
their combs are made, is no more than this meal digested, and wrought into a
paste. When the flowers upon which bees generally feed, are not fully blown,
and this meal or dust is not offered in sufficient quantities, the bees pinch
the tops of the stamina in which it is contained, with their teeth; and thus
anticipate the progress of vegetation. In April and May, the bees are busy,
from morning to evening, in gathering this meal; but when the weather becomes
too hot in the midst of summer, they work only in the morning.

The be is furnished with a stomach for its wax, as well as its honey. In the
former of the two, their powder is altered, digested and concocted into real
wax; and is thus ejected by the same passage by which it was swallowed. Every
comb, newly made, is white: but it becomes yellow as it grows old, and almost
black when kept too long in the hive. Beside the wax thus digested, there is a
large portion of the powder kneaded up for food in every hive, and kept in
separate cells, for winter provision. This is called, by the country people,
bee-bread; and contributes to the health and strength of the animal during
winter. Those who rear bees, may rob them of their honey, and feed them, during
the winter, with treacle; but no proper substitute has yet been found for the
bee-bread; and, without it, the animals become consumptive and die.

As for the honey, it is extracted from that part of the flower called the
nectareum. From the mouth this delicious fluid passes into the gullet; and then
into the first stomach, or honey-bag, which, when filled, appears like an
oblong bladder. Children, that live in country places, are well acquainted with
this bladder; and destroy many bees to come at their store of honey. When a be
has sufficiently filled its first stomach, it returns back to the hive, where
it disgorges the honey into one of the cells. It often happens that the be
delivers its store to some other, at the mouth of the hive, and flies off for a
fresh supply. Some honey-combs are always left open for common use; but many
others are stopped up, till there is a necessity of opening them. Each of these
are covered carefully with wax; so close, that the covers seem to be made at
the very instant the fluid is deposited within them.

Having thus given a cursory description of the insect, individually
considered, and of the habitation it forms, we next come to its social habits
and institutions: and, in considering this little animal attentively, after the
necessary precautions for the immediate preservation of the community, its
second care is turned to the continuance of posterity. How numerous soever the
multitude of bees may appear in one swarm, yet they all owe their original to a
single parent, which is called the queen-bee. It is indeed surprising that a
single insect shall, in one summer, give birth to above twenty thousand young:
but, upon opening her body, the wonder will cease; as the number of eggs
appearing, at one time, amounts to five thousand. This animal, whose existence
is of such importance to her subjects, may easily be distinguished from the
rest, by her size, and the shape of her body. On her safety depends the whole
welfare of the commonwealth; and the attentions paid her by all the rest of the
swarm, evidently show the dependence her subjects have upon her security. If
this insect be carefully observed, she will be seen at times attended with a
numerous retinue, marching from cell to cell, plunging the extremity of her
body into many of them, and leaving a small egg in each.

The bees which generally compose her train, are thought to be males, which
serve to impregnate her by turns. These are larger and blacker than the common
bees; without stings, and without industry. They seem formed only to transmit a
posterity; and to attend the queen, whenever she thinks proper to issue from
the secret retreats of the hive, where she most usually resides. Upon the union
of these two kinds depends all expectations of a future progeny; for the
working bees are of no sex, and only labor for another offspring: yet such is
their attention to their queen, that if she happens to die, they will leave off
working, and take no farther care of posterity. If, however, another queen is
in this state of universal despair presented them, they immediately acknowledge
her for sovereign, and once more diligently apply to their labor. It must be
observed, however, that all this fertility of the queen-bee, and the great
attentions paid to her by the rest, are controverted by more recent observers.
They assert, that the common bees are parents themselves; that they deposite
their eggs in the cells which they have prepared; that the females are
impregnated by the males, and bring forth a progeny, which is wholly their own.

However, to go on with their history, as delivered us by Mr. Reaumur -- When
the queen-bee has deposited the number of eggs necessary in the cells, the
working bees undertake the care of the rising posterity. They are seen to leave
off their usual employments; to construct proper receptacles for eggs; or to
complete those that are already formed. They purposely build little cells,
extremely solid, for the young; in which they employ a great deal of wax: those
designed for lodging the males, as was already observed, are larger than the
rest; and those for the queen-bees the largest of all. There is usually but one
egg deposited in every cell; but when the fecundity of the queen is such, that
it exceeds the number of cells already prepared, there are sometimes three or
four eggs crowded together in the same apartment. But this is an inconvenience
that the working bees will by no means suffer. They seem sensible that, two
young ones, stuffed up in the same cell, when they grow larger, will but
embarrass, and at last destroy each other: they therefore take care to leave a
cell to every egg; and remove, or destroy the rest.

The single egg that is left remaining, is fixed to the bottom of the cell, and
touches it but in a single point. A day or two after it is deposited, the worm
is excluded from the shell of the egg, having the appearance of a maggot rolled
up in a ring, and lying softly on a bed of a whitish colored jelly; upon which
also the little animal begins to feed. In the mean time, the instant it
appears, the working bees attend it with the most anxious and parental
tenderness; they furnish it every hour with a supply of this whitish substance,
on which it feeds and lies; and watch the cell with unremitting care. They are
nurses that have a greater affection for the offspring of others, than many
parents have for their own children. They are constant in visiting each cell,
and seeing that nothing is wanting; preparing the white mixture, which is
nothing but a composition of honey and wax, in their own bowels, with which
they feed them. Thus attended, and plentifully fed, the worm, in less than six
days time, comes to its full growth, and no longer accepts the food offered it.
When the bees perceive that it has no further occasion for feeding, they
perform the last offices of tenderness, and shut the little animal up in its
cell; walling up the mouth of its apartment with wax: there they leave the worm
to itself; having secured it from every external injury.

The worm is no sooner left enclosed, but, from a state of inaction, it begins
to labor, extending and shortening its body; and by this means lining the
walls of its apartment with a silken tapestry, which it spins in the manner of
caterpillars, before they undergo their last transformation. When their cell is
thus prepared, the animal is soon after transformed into an aurelia; but
differing from that of the common caterpillar, as it exhibits not only the
legs, but the wings of the future be, in its present state of inactivity.
Thus, in about twenty, or one and twenty days after the egg was laid, the be
is completely formed, and fitted to undergo the fatigues of its state. When all
its parts have acquired their proper strength and consistence, the young animal
opens its prison, by piercing with its teeth the waxen door that confines it.
When just freed from its cell, it is as yet moist, and incommoded with the
spoils of its former situation; but the officious bees are soon seen to flock
round it, and to lick it clean on all sides with their trunks; while another
band, with equal assiduity, are observed to feed it with honey: others again
begin immediately to cleanse the cell that has been just left; to carry the
ordures out of the hive, and to fit the place for a new inhabitant. The young
be soon repays their care, by its industry; for as soon as ever its external
parts become dry, it discovers its natural appetites for labor, and
industriously begins the task, which it pursues unremittingly through life. The
toil of man is irksome to him, and he earns his subsistence with pain; but this
little animal seems happy in its pursuits, and finds delight in all its
employments.

When just freed from the cell, and properly equipped by its fellow bees for
duty, it at once issues from the hive, and instructed only by nature, goes in
quest of flowers, chooses only those that yield it a supply, rejects such as are
barren of honey, or have been already drained by other adventurers; and when
loaded, is never at a loss to find its way back to the common habitation. After
this first sally, it begins to gather the mealy powder, that lies on every
flower, which is afterward converted into wax; and with this, the very first
day, it returns with two large balls stuck to its thighs.

When bees first begin to break their prisons, there are generally above a
hundred excluded in one day. Thus, in the space of a few weeks, the number of
the inhabitants in one hive, of moderate size, becomes so great, that there is
no place to contain the new comers; and they are scarcely excluded from the
cell, when they are obliged, by the old bees, to sally forth in quest of new
habitations. In other words, the hive begins to swarm, and the new progeny
prepares for exile.

While there is room enough in the hive, the bees remain quietly together; it
is necessity alone that compels the separation. Sometimes, indeed, the young
brood, with graceless obstinacy, refuse to depart, and even venture to resist
their progenitors. The young ones are known by being browner than the old, with
whiter hair; the old ones are of a lighter color, with red hair. The two
armies are therefore easily distinguishable, and dreadful battles are often
seen to ensue. But the victory almost ever terminates with strict poetical
justice in favor of the veterans, and the rebellious offspring are driven off,
not without loss and mutilation.

In different countries, the swarms make their appearance at different times of
the year, and there are several signs previous to this intended migration. The
night before, an unusual buzzing is heard in the hive; in the morning, though
the weather be soft and inviting, they seem not to obey the call, being intent
on more important meditations within. All labor is discontinued in the hive,
every be is either employed in forcing, or reluctantly yielding a submission;
at length, after some noise and tumult, a queen be is chosen, to guard, rather
than conduct, the young colony to other habitations, and then they are
marshalled without any apparent conductor. In less than a minute, they leave
their native abode, and forming a cloud round their protectress, they set off,
without seeming to know the place of their destination; The world before them,
where to choose their place of rest. The usual time of swarming, is from ten in
the morning, to three in the afternoon, when the sun shines bright, and invites
them to seek their fortunes. They flutter for a while, in the air, like flakes
of snow, and sometimes undertake a distant journey, but more frequently are
contented with some neighboring asylum; the branch of a tree, a chimney top,
or some other exposed situation. It is, indeed, remarkable, that all those
animals, of what ever kind, that have long been under the protection of man,
seem to lose a part of their natural sagacity, in providing for themselves. The
rabbit, when domesticated, forgets to dig holes, the hen to build a nest, and
the be to seek a shelter, that shall protect it from the inclemencies of
winter. In those countries, where the bees are wild, and unprotected by man,
they are always sure to build their waxen cells in the hollow of a tree; but
with us, they seem improvident provident in their choice, and the first green
branch that stops their flight, seems to be thought sufficient for their abode
through winter. However, it does not appear, that the queen chooses the place
where they are to alight, for many of the stragglers, who seem to be pleased
with a particular branch, go and settle upon it; others are seen to succeed,
and at last, the queen herself, when she finds a sufficient number there before
her, goes to make it the place of her head quarters. When the queen is settled,
the rest of the swarm soon follow; and, in about a quarter of an hour, the
whole body seem to be at ease. It sometimes is found, that there are two or
three queens to a swarm, and the colony is divided into parties; but it most
usually happens, that one of these is more considerable than the other, and the
bees by degrees, desert the weakest, to take shelter under the most powerful
protector. The deserted queen does not long survive this defeat; she takes
refuge under the new monarch, and is soon destroyed by her jealous rival. Till
this cruel execution is performed, the bees never go out to work; and if there
should be a queen be, belonging to the new colony, left in the old hive, she
always undergoes the fate of the former. However, it must be observed, that the
bees never sacrifice any of their queens, when the hive is full of wax and
honey; for there is at that time, no danger in maintaining a plurality of
breeders.

When the swarm is thus conducted to a place of rest, and the policy of
government is settled, the bees soon resume their former labors. The making
cells, storing them with honey, impregnating the queen, making proper cells for
the reception of the rising progeny, and protecting them from external danger,
employ their unceasing industry. But soon after, and toward the latter end of
summer, when the colony is sufficiently stored with inhabitants, a most cruel
policy ensues. The drone bees, which are (as has been said) generally in a
hive, to the number of an hundred, are marked for slaughter. These, which had
hitherto led a life of indolence and pleasure, whose only employment was in
impregnating the queen, and rioting upon the labors of the hive, without
aiding in the general toil, now share the fate of most voluptuaries, and fall a
sacrifice to the general resentment of society.

The working bees, in a body, declare war against them; and in two or three
days time, the ground all round the hive is covered with their dead bodies.
Nay, the working bees will even kill such drones, as are yet in the worm state,
in the cell, and eject their bodies from the hive, among the general carnage.

When a hive sends out several swarms in the year, the first is always the
best, and the most numerous. These, having the whole summer before them, have
the more time for making wax and honey, and consequently their labors are the
most valuable to the proprietor. Although the swarm chiefly consists of the
youngest bees, yet it is often found, that bees of all ages compose the
multitude of emigrants, and it often happens, that bees of all ages are seen
remaining behind. The number of them is always more considerable than that of
some populous cities, for sometimes upwards of forty thousand are found in a
single hive. So large a body may well be supposed to work with great
expedition; and in fact, in less than twenty-four hours, they will make combs
above twenty inches long, and seven or eight broad. Sometimes they will half
fill their hives with wax, in less than five days. In the first fifteen days,
they are always found to make more wax than they do afterward during the rest
of the year.

Such are the out-lines of the natural history of these annimals, as usually
found in our own country. How they are treated, so as to produce the greatest
quantity of honey, belongs rather to the rural oeconomist, than the natural
historian; volumes have been written on the subject, and still more remains
equally curious and new. One thing, however, it may be proper to observe, that
a farm, or a country, may be over stocked with bees, as with any other sort of
animal; for a certain number of hives, always require a certain number of
flowers to subsist on. When the flowers near home are rifled, then are these
industrious insects seen taking more extensive ranges, but their abilities may
be over taxed; and if they are obliged, in quest of honey, to go too far from
home, they are over-wearied in the pursuit, they are devoured by birds, or beat
down by the winds and rain.

For a knowledge of this, in some parts of France and Piedmont, they have
contrived, as I have often seen, a kind of floating bee-house.

They have on board one barge, threescore or an hundred bee-hives, well
defended from the inclemency of an accidental storm; and with these, the owners
suffer themselves to float gently down the river. As the bees are continually
choosing their flowery pasture along the banks of the stream, they are furnished
with sweets before unrifled; and thus a single floating bee-house, yields the
proprietor a considerable income. Why a method similar to this has never been
adopted in England, where we have more gentle rivers, and more flowery banks,
than in any other part of the world, I know not; certainly it might be turned
to advantage, and yield the possessor a secure, though perhaps a moderate
income.

Having mentioned the industry of these admirable insects, it will be proper to
say something of the effects of their labor, of that wax and honey, which are
turned by man to such various uses. Bees gather two kinds of wax, one coarse
and the other fine. The coarser sort is bitter, and with this, which is called
propolis, they stop up all the holes and crevices of their hives. It is of a
more resinous nature than the fine wax, and is consequently better qualified to
resist the moisture of the season, and preserve the works warm and dry within.
The fine wax is as necessary to the animals preservation as the honey itself.
With this they make their lodgings, with this they cover the cells of their
young, and in this they lay up their magazines of honey. This is made, as has
been already observed, from the dust of flowers, which is carefully kneaded by
the little insect, then swallowed, and having undergone a kind of digestion, is
formed into the cells, which answers such a variety of purposes. To collect
this, the animal rolls itself in the flower it would rob, and thus takes up the
vegetable dust with the hair of its body. Then carefully brushing it into a
lump, with its fore paws it thrusts the composition into two cavities behind
the thighs, which are made like spoons to receive the wax, and the hair that
lines them, serves to keep it from falling.

As of wax, there are also two kinds of honey. The white and the yellow. The
white is taken without fire from the honey-combs. The yellow is extracted by
heat, and squeezed through bags, in a press. The best honey is new, thick and
granulated, of a clear transparent white color, of a soft and aromatic smell,
and of a sweet lively taste. Honey made in mountainous countries, is preferable
to that of the valley. The honey made in the spring, is more highly esteemed,
than that gathered in summer, which last is still more valuable, than that of
autumn, when the flowers begin to fade and lose their fragrance.

The bees are nearly alike in all parts of the world, yet there are differences
worthy our notice. In Guadaloupe, the be is less by one half, than the
European, and more black and round. They have no sting, and make their cells in
hollow trees; where, if the hole they meet with is too large, they form a sort
of waxen house, of the shape of a pear, and in this they lodge and store their
honey, and lay their eggs. They lay up their honey in waxen vessels, of the
size of a pigeon's egg, of a black or deep violet color; and these are so
joined together, that there is no space left between them. The honey never
congeals, but is fluid, of the consistence of oil, and the color of amber.
Resembling these, there are found little black bees, without a sting, in all
the tropical climates; and though these countries are replete with bees, like
our own, yet those form the most useful and laborious tribe in that part of the
world. The honey they produce, is neither so unpalatable, nor so surfeiting as
ours; and the wax is so soft, that it is only used for medicinal purposes, it
being never found hard enough to form into candles, as in Europe.

Of insects, that receive the name of bees, among us, there are several; which,
however, differ very widely from that industrious social race we have been just
describing. The HUMBLE BE is the largest of all this tribe, being as large as
the first joint of one's middle finger. These are seen in every field, and
perched on every flower. They build their nest in holes in the ground, of dry
leaves, mixed with wax and wool, defended with moss from the weather. Each
humble be makes a separate cell about the size of a small nutmeg, which is
round and hollow, containing the honey in a bag. Several of these cells are
joined together, in such a manner, that the whole appears like a cluster of
grapes. The females, which have the appearance of wasps, are very few, and
their eggs are laid in cells, which the rest soon cover over with wax. It is
uncertain whether they have a queen or not; but there is one much larger than
the rest, without wings, and without hair, and all over black, like polished
ebony. This goes and views all the works, from time to time, and enters into
the cell, as if it wanted to see whether every thing was done right: In the
morning, the young humble bees are very idle, and seem not at all inclined to
labor, till one of the largest, about seven o'clock, thrusts half its body
from a hole, designed for that purpose, and seated on the top of the nest,
beats its wings for twenty minutes successively, buzzing the whole time, till
the whole colony is put in motion. The humble bees gather honey, as well as the
common bees; but it is neither so fine, nor so good, nor the wax so clean, or
so capable of fusion.

Besides the bees already mentioned, there are various kinds among us, that
have much the appearance of honey-makers, and yet make only wax. The WOOD BE
is seen in every garden. It is rather larger than the common queen be; its
body of a blueish black, which is smooth and shining. It begins to appear at
the approach of spring, and is seen flying near walls exposed to a sunny
aspect. This be makes its nest in some piece of wood, which it contrives to
scoop and hollow for its purpose. This, however, is never done in trees that
are standing, for the wood it makes choice of is half rotten. The holes are not
made directly forward, but turning to one side, and have an opening sufficient
to admit one's middle finger; from whence runs the inner apartment, generally
twelve or fifteen inches long. The instruments used in boring these cavities,
are their teeth; the cavity is usually branched into three or four apartments;
and in each of these, they lay their eggs, to the number of ten or twelve, each
separate and distinct from the rest: The egg is involved in a sort of paste,
which serves at once for the young animal's protection and nourishment. The
grown bees, however, feed upon small insects, particularly a louse, of a
reddish brown color, of the size of a small pin's head.

MASON BEES make their cells with a sort of mortar, made of earth, which they
build against a wall that is exposed to the sun. The mortar, which at first is
soft, soon becomes as hard as stone, and in this their eggs are laid. Each nest
contains seven or eight cells, an egg in every cell, placed regularly one over
the other. If the nest remains unhurt, or wants but little repairs, they make
use of them the year ensuing: and thus they often serve three or four years
successively. From the strength of their houses, one would think these bees in
perfect security, yet none are more exposed than they. A worm with very strong
teeth, is often found to bore into their little fortifications, and devour
their young.

The GROUND BE builds its nest in the earth, wherein they make round holes,
five or six inches deep; the mouth being narrow, and only just sufficient to
admit the little inhabitant. It is amusing enough, to observe the patience and
assiduity with which they labor. They carry out all the earth, grain by grain,
to the mouth of the hole, where it forms a little hillock, an Alps compared to
the power of the artist by which it is raised. Sometimes the walks of a garden
are found undermined by their labors; some of the holes running directly
downward, others horizontally beneath the surface. They lay up in these
cavities provisions for their young, which consist of a paste that has the
appearance of corn, and is of a sweetish taste.

The LEAF-CUTTING BEES make their nest and lay their eggs among bits of leaves,
very artificially placed in holes in the earth, of about the length of a
tooth-pick case. They make the bits of leaves of a roundish form, and with them
line the inside of their habitations. This tapestry is still further lined by a
reddish kind of paste, somewhat sweet or acid. These bees are of various kinds;
those that build their nests with chesnut-leaves are as big as drones, but
those of the rose-tree are smaller than the common be.

The WALL BEES are so called, because they make their nests in walls of a kind
of silky membrane with which they fill up the vacuities between the small
stones which form the sides of their habitation. Their apartment consists of
several cells placed end to end, each in the shape of a woman's thimble. Though
the web which lines this habitation is thick and warm, yet it is transparent
and of a whitish color. This substance is supposed to be spun from the
animal's body; the male and females are of a size, but the former are without a
sting. To these varieties of the be kind might be added several others which
are all different in nature, but not sufficiently distinguished to excite
curiosity.

CHAP. III. Of the Wasp and Hornet.
HOWEVER similar many insects may be in appearance, this does not imply a
similitude in their history. The be and the wasp resemble each other very
strongly, yet, in examining their manner and their duration, they differ very
widely; the be labors to lay up honey, and lives to enjoy the fruits of its
industry; the wasp appears equally assiduous, but only works for posterity, as
the habitation is scarcely completed when the inhabitant dies.

The wasp is well known to be a winged insect with a sting. To be longer in
proportion to its bulk than the be, to be marked with bright yellow circles
round its body, and to be the most swift and active insect of all the fly kind.
On each side of the mouth this animal is furnished with a long tooth, notched
like a saw, and with these it is enabled to cut any substance, not omitting
meat itself, and to carry it to its nest. Wasps live like bees in community,
and sometimes ten or twelve thousand are found inhabiting a single nest.

Of all other insects the wasp is the most fierce, voracious, and most
dangerous, when enraged. They are seen wherever flesh is cutting up, gorging
themselves with the spoil, and then flying to their nests with their reeking
prey. They make war also on every other fly, and the spider himself dreads
their approaches.

Every community among bees is composed of females or queens, drones or males,
and neutral or working bees. Wasps have similar occupations; the two first are
for propagating the species, the last for nursing, defending and supporting the
rising progeny. Among bees, however, there is seldom above a queen or two in an
hive; among wasps there are above two or three hundred.

As soon as the summer begins to invigorate the insect tribes, the wasps are
the most of the number, and diligently employed either in providing provisions
for their nest, if already made, or in making one, if the former habitation be
too small to receive the increasing community. The nest is one of the most
curious objects in natural history, and contrived almost as artificially as
that of the bees themselves. Their principal care is to seek out an hole that
has been begun by some other animal, a field mouse, a rat, or a mole, to build
their nests in. They sometimes build upon the plain, where they are sure of the
dryness of their situation, but most commonly on the side of a bank to avoid
the rain or water that would otherwise annoy them. When they have chosen a
proper place they go to work with wonderful assiduity. Their first labor is to
enlarge and widen the hole, taking away the earth and carrying it off to some
distance. They are perfectly formed for labor, being furnished with a trunk
above their mouths, two saws on each side which play to the right and left
against each other, and six strong muscular legs to support them. They cut the
earth into small parcels with their saws, and carry it out with their legs or
paws. This is the work of some days; and at length the outline of their
habitation is formed, making a cavity of about a foot and an half every way.
While some are working in this manner, others are roving the fields to seek out
materials for their building. To prevent the earth from falling down and
crushing their rising city into ruin, they make a sort of roof with their gluey
substance, to which they begin to fix the rudiments of their building, working
from the top downwards, as if they were hanging a bell, which, however at
length they close up at the bottom. The materials with which they build their
nests are bits of wood and glue. The wood they get where they can from the
rails and posts which they meet with in the fields and elsewhere. These they
saw and divide into a multitude of small fibers, of which they take up little
bundles in their claws, letting fall upon them a few drops of gluey matter with
which their bodies are provided, by the help of which they knead the whole
composition into a paste, which serves them in their future building. When they
have returned with this to the nest, they stick their load of paste on that
part where they make their walls and partitions; they tread it close with their
feet, and trowel it with their trunks, still going backwards as they work.
Having repeated this operation three or four times, the composition is at
length flatted out until it becomes a small leaf of a gray color, much finer
than paper, and of a pretty firm texture. This done the same wasp returns to
the field to collect a second load of paste, repeating the same several times,
placing layer upon layer, and strengthening every partition in proportion to
the wants or conveniences of the general fabric. Other working wasps come
quickly after to repeat the same operation, laying more leaves upon the former,
till at length, after much toil, they have finished the large roof which is to
secure them from the tumbling in of the earth. This dome being finished, they
make another entrance to their habitation, designed either for letting in the
warmth of the sun, or for escaping in case one door be invaded by plunderers.
Certain however it is, that by one of these they always enter, by the other
they sally forth to their toil; each hole being so small that they can pass but
one at a time. The walls being thus composed, and the whole somewhat of the
shape of a pear, they labor at their cells, which they compose of the same
paper-like substance that goes to the formation of their outside works. Their
combs differ from those of bees, not less in the composition than the position
which they are always seen to obtain. The honeycomb of the be is edgeways
with respect to the hive; that of the wasp is flat, and the mouth of every cell
opens downwards. Thus is their habitation, contrived story above story,
supported by several rows of pillars which give firmness to the whole building,
while the upper story is flat-roofed, and as smooth as the pavement of a room,
laid with squares of marble. The wasps can freely walk upon these stories
between the pillars to do whatever their wants require. The pillars are very
hard and compact, being larger at each end than in the middle, not much unlike
the columns of a building. All the cells of the nest are only destined for the
reception of the young, being replete with neither wax nor honey.

Each cell is like that of the be, hexagonal; but they are of two sorts, the
one larger for the production of the male and female wasps, the other less for
the reception of the working part of the community. When the females are
impregnated by the males, they lay their eggs, one in each cell, and stick it
in with a kind of gummy matter to prevent its falling out. From this egg
proceeds the insect in its worm-state, of which the old ones are extremely
careful, feeding it from time to time till it becomes large and entirely fills
up its cell. But the wasp community differs from that of the be in this; that
among the latter the working bees take the parental duties upon them, whereas
among the wasps the females alone are permitted to feed their young, and to
nurse their rising progeny. For this purpose the female waits with great
patience till the working wasps have brought in their provisions, which she
takes from them, and cuts into pieces. She then goes with great composure from
cell to cell, and feeds every young one with her mouth. When the young worms
have come to a certain size they leave off eating, and begin to spin a very
fine silk, fixing the first end to the entrance of the cell, then turning their
heads, first on one side, then on the other, they fix the thread to different
parts, and thus they make a sort of a door which serves to close up the mouth
of the cell. After this they divest themselves of their skins after the usual
mode of transformation, the aurelia by degrees begins to emancipate itself from
its shell; by little and little it thrusts out its legs and wings, and
insensibly acquires the color and shape of its parent.

The wasp thus formed, and prepared for depredation, becomes a bold,
troublesome, and dangerous insect: there are no dangers which it will not
encounter in pursuit of its prey, and nothing seems to satiate its gluttony.
Though it can gather no honey of its own, no animal is more fond of sweets. For
this purpose it will pursue the be and the humble be, destroy them with its
sting, and then plunder them of their honey-bag, with which it flies
triumphantly loaded to its nest to regale its young. Wasps are ever fond of
making their nests in the neighborhood of bees, merely to have an opportunity
of robbing their hives, and feasting on the spoil. Yet the bees are not found
always patiently submissive to their tyranny, but fierce battles are sometimes
seen to ensue, in which the bees make up by conduct and numbers what they want
in personal prowess. When there is no honey to be had, they seek for the best
and sweetest fruits, and they are never mistaken in their choice. From the
garden they fly to the city, to the grocers shops, and butchers shambles. They
will sometimes carry off bits of flesh half as big as themselves, with which
they fly to their nests for the nourishment of their brood. Those who cannot
drive them away, lay for them a piece of ox's liver, which being without
fibers, they prefer to other flesh; and whenever they are found, all other
flies are seen to desert the place immediately. Such is the dread with which
these little animals impress all the rest of the insect tribes, which they
seize and devour without mercy, that they vanish at their approach. Wherever
they fly, like the eagle or the falcon, they form a desert in the air around
them. In this manner the summer is passed in plundering the neighborhood, and
rearing up their young; every day adds to their numbers; and from their
strength, agility, and indiscriminate appetite for every kind of provision,
were they as long lived as the be, they would soon swarm upon the face of
nature, and become the most noxious plague of man: but providentially their
lives are measured to their mischief, and they live but a single season.

While the summer heats continue, they are bold, voracious, and enterprizing;
but as the sun withdraws, it seems to rob them of their courage and activity.
In proportion as the cold increases, they are seen to become more domestic;
they seldom leave the nest, they make but short adventures from home, they
flutter about in the noonday heats, and soon after return chilled and feeble.

As their calamities increase, new passions soon begin to take place; the care
for posterity no longer continues, and as the parents are no longer able to
provide their growing progeny a supply, they take the barbarous resolution of
sacrificing them all to the necessity of the times. In this manner, like a
garrison upon short allowance, all the useless hands are destroyed; the young
worms, which a little before they fed and protected with so much assiduity, are
now butchered and dragged from their cells. As the cold increases they no
longer find sufficient warmth in their nests, which grow hateful to them, and
they fly to seek it in the corners of houses, and places that receive an
artificial heat. But the winter is still insupportable; and, before the new
year begins, they wither and die; the working bees first, the males soon
following, and many of the females suffering in the general calamity. In every
nest, however, one or two females survive the winter, and having been
impregnated by the male during the preceding season, she begins in spring to
lay her eggs in a little hole of her own contrivance. This bundle of eggs,
which is clustered together like grapes, soon produces two worms which the
female takes proper precaution to defend and supply, and these when hatched
soon give assistance to the female, who is employed in hatching two more; these
also gathering strength, extricate themselves out of the web that enclosed
them, and become likewise assistants to their mother; fifteen days after, two
more make their appearance; thus is the community every day increasing, while
the female lays in every cell, first a male and then a female. These soon after
become breeders in turn, till, from a single female, ten thousand wasps are
seen produced before the month of June. After the female has thus produced her
progeny, which are distributed in different districts, they assemble from all
parts, in the middle of summer, and provide for themselves the large and
commodious habitation, which has been described above.

Such is the history of the social wasp; but, as among bees, so also among
these insects, there are various tribes that live in solitude: these lay their
eggs in a hole for the purpose, and the parent dies long before the birth of
its offspring. In the principal species of the SOLITARY WASPS, the insect is
smaller than the working wasp of the social kind. The filament, by which the
corselet is joined to the body, is longer and more distinctly seen, and the
whole color of the insect is blacker than in the ordinary kinds. But it is not
their figure, but the manners of this extraordinary insect that claim our
principal regard.

From the end of May to the beginning of July, this wasp is seen most
diligently employed. The whole purpose of its life seems to be in contriving
and fitting up a commodious apartment for its young one, which is not to
succeed it till the year ensuing. For this end it is employed, with unwearied
assiduity, in boring a hole into the finest earth some inches deep, but not
much wider than the diameter of its own body. This is but a gallery leading to
a wider apartment destined for the convenient lodgment of its young. As it
always chooses a gravelly soil to work in, and where the earth is almost as hard
as stone itself; the digging and hollowing this apartment is an enterprise of
no small labor: for effecting its operations, this insect is furnished with
two teeth, which are strong and firm, but not sufficiently hard to penetrate
the substance through which it is resolved to make its way. In order therefore
to soften that earth which it is unable to pierce, it is furnished with a gummy
liquor which it emits upon the place, and which renders it more easily
separable from the rest, and the whole becoming a kind of soft paste is removed
to the mouth of the habitation. The animal's provision of liquor in these
operations is however soon exhausted; and it is then seen either taking up
water from some neighboring flower or stream in order to supply the deficiency.

At length, after much toil, a hole some inches deep is formed, at the bottom
of which is a large cavity; and to this no other hostile insect would venture
to find its way, from the length and the narrowness of the defile through which
it would be obliged to pass. In this the solitary wasp lays its egg, which is
destined to continue the species; there the nascent animal is to continue for
above nine months, unattended and immured, and at first appearance the most
helpless insect of the creation. But when we come to examine, new wonders
offer, no other insect can boast so copiously luxurious a provision, or such
confirmed security.

As soon as the mother wasp has deposited her egg at the bottom of the hole,
her next care is to furnish it with a supply of provisions, which may be
offered to the young insect as soon as it leaves the egg. To this end she
procures a number of little green worms, generally from eight to twelve, and
these are to serve as food for the young one the instant it awakens into life.
When this supply is regularly arranged and laid in, the old one then, with as
much assiduity as it before worked out its hole, now closes the mouth of the
passage; and thus leaving its young one immured in perfect security, and in a
copious supply of animal food, she dies satisfied with having provided for a
future progeny.

When the young one leaves the egg it is scarcely visible, and is seen immured
among a number of insects, infinitely larger than itself, ranged in proper
order around it, which, however give it no manner of apprehension. Whether the
parent, when she laid in the insect provision, contrived to disable the worms
from resistance, or whether they were at first incapable of any, is not known.
Certain it is, that the young glutton feasts upon the living spoil without any
control; his game lies at his hand, and he devours one after the other as the
calls of appetite incite him. The life of the young animal is therefore spent
in the most luxurious manner, till its whole stock of worms is exhausted, and
then the time of its transformation begins to approach; and then spinning a
silken web, it continues fixed in its cell till the sun calls it from its dark
abode the ensuing summer.

The wasps of Europe are very mischievous, yet they are innocence itself when
compared to those of the tropical climates, where all the insect tribes are not
only numerous, but large, voracious, and formidable. Those of the West Indies
are thicker, and twice as long as the common be; they are of a gray color,
striped with yellow, and armed with a very dangerous sting. They make their
cells in the manner of a honeycomb, in which the young ones are hatched and
bred. They generally hang their nests by threads, composed of the same
substance with the cells, to the branches of trees, and the eaves of houses.
They are seen every where in great abundance, descending like fruit,
particularly pears, of which shape they are, and as large as one's head. The
inside is divided into three round stories, full of cells, each hexagonal, like
those of an honeycomb. In some of the islands, these insects are so very
numerous, that their nests are stuck up in this manner, scarce two feet
asunder, and the inhabitants are in continual apprehension from their
accidental resentment. It sometimes happens, that no precautions can prevent
their attacks, and the pains of their sting is almost insupportable. Those who
have felt it think it more terrible than even that of a scorpion; the whole
visage swells, and the features are so disfigured, that a person is scarcely
known by his most intimate acquaintance.

CHAP. IV. Of the Ichnumon Fly.
EVERY rank of insects, how voracious soever, have enemies that are terrible to
them, and that revenge upon them the injuries done upon the rest of the
animated creation. The wasp, as we have seen, is very troublesome to man, and
very formidable to the insect tribe; but the ichnumon fly (of which there are
many varieties) fears not the wasp itself, it enters its retreats, plunders its
habitations, and takes possession of that cell for its own young, which the
wasp had laboriously built for a dearer posterity.

Though there are many different kinds of this insect, yet the most formidable,
and that best known, is called the common ichnumon, with four wings, like the
be, a long slender black body, and a three forked tail, consisting of
bristles; the two outermost black, and the middlemost red. This fly receives
its name from the little quadrupede, which is found to be so destructive to the
crocodile, as it bears a strong similitude in its courage and rapacity.

Though this instrument is, to all appearance, slender and feeble, yet it is
found to be a weapon of great force and efficacy. There is scarce any substance
which it will not pierce; and, indeed, it is seldom seen but employed in
penetration. This is the weapon of defense, this is employed in destroying its
prey, and still more, by this the animal deposites her eggs wherever she
thinks fit to lay them. As it is an instrument chiefly employed for this
purpose, the male is unprovided with such a sting, while the female uses it
with great force and dexterity, brandishing it when caught, from side to side,
and very often wounding those who thought they held her with the greatest
security.

All the flies of this tribe are produced in the same manner, and owe their
birth to the destruction of some other insect, within whose body they have been
deposed, and upon whose vitals they have preyed, till they came to maturity.
There is no insect whatever, which they will not attack, in order to leave
their fatal present in its body; the caterpillar, the gnat, and even the spider
himself, so formidable to others, is often made the unwilling fosterer of this
destructive progeny.

About the middle of summer, when other insects are found in great abundance,
the ichnumon is seen flying busily about, and seeking proper objects upon whom
to depose its progeny. As there are various kinds of this fly, so they seem to
have various appetites. Some are found to place their eggs within the aurelia
of some nascent insect, others place them within the nest, which the wasp had
curiously contrived for its own young; and as both are produced at the same
time, the young of the ichnumon, not only devours the young wasp, but the whole
supply of worms, which the parent had carefully provided for its provision. But
the greatest number of the ichnumon tribe are seen settling upon the back of
the caterpillar, and darting, at different intervals, their stings into its
body. At every dart they depose an egg, while the wounded animal seems scarcely
sensible of the injury it sustains. In this manner they leave from six to a
dozen of their eggs, within the fatty substance of the reptile's body, and then
fly off to commit further depredations. In the mean time the caterpillar thus
irreparably injured, seems to feed as voraciously as before, does not abate of
its usual activity; and to all appearance, seems no way affected by the
internal enemies that are preparing its destruction in their darksome abode.
But they soon burst from their egg state, and begin to prey upon the substance
of their prison. As they grow larger, they require a greater supply, till at
last the animal, by whose vitals they are supported, is no longer able to
sustain them, but dies; its whole inside being almost eaten away. It often
happens, however, that it survives their worm state, and then they change into
a chrysalis, enclosed in the caterpillar's body till the time of their delivery
approaches, when they burst their prisons and fly away. The caterpillar,
however, is irreparably destroyed, it never changes into a chrysalis, but dies
shortly after, from the injuries it had sustained.

Such is the history of this fly, which though very terrible to the insect
tribe, fails not to be of infinite service to mankind. The millions which it
kills in a single summer, are unconceiveable; and without such a destroyer, the
fruits of the earth would only rise to furnish a banquet for the insect race,
to the exclusion of all the nobler ranks of animated nature.

CHAP. V. Of the Ant.
THOUGH the number of two winged flies be very great, and the naturalists have
taken some pains to describe their characters and varieties; yet there is such
a similitude in their forms and manners, that in a work like this, one
description must serve for all. We now therefore, come to a species of four
winged insects, that are famous from all antiquity, for their social and
industrious habits, that are marked for their spirit of subordination, that are
offered as a pattern of parsimony, to the profuse, and of unremitting diligence
to the sluggard.

In the experiments, however, which have been more recently made, and the
observations which have been taken, much of their boasted frugality and
precaution seems denied them; the treasures they lay up, are no longer
supposed, intended for future provision, and the choice they make in their
stores, seems no way dictated by wisdom. It is, indeed, somewhat surprising,
that almost every writer of antiquity, should describe this insect, as
laboring in the summer, and feasting upon the produce during the winter.
Perhaps, in some of the warmer climates, where the winter is mild, and of short
contiuance, this may take place; but in France and England, these animals can
have no manner of occasion for a supply of winter provisions, as they are
actually in a state of torpidity during that season.

The common ants of Europe, are of two or three different kinds; some red, some
black, some with stings, and others without. Such as have stings, inflict their
wounds in that manner; such as are unprovided with these weapons of defense,
have a power of spurting, from their hinder parts, an acid pungent liquor,
which, if it lights upon the skin, inflames and burns it like nettles.

The body of an ant is divided, into the head, breast and belly. In the head,
the eyes are placed, which are entirely black, and under the eyes, there are
two small horns or feelers, composed of twelve joints, all covered with a fine
silky hair. The mouth is furnished with two crooked jaws, which project
outward, in each of which are seen incisures, that look like teeth. The breast
is covered with a fine silky hair, from which project six legs, that are pretty
strong and hairy, the extremities of each armed with two small claws, which the
animal uses in climbing. The belly is more reddish than the rest of the body,
which is of a brown chestnut color, it is as shining as glass, and covered with
extremely fine hair.

From such a formation, this animal seems bolder, and more active, for its
size, than any other of the insect tribe, and fears not to attack a creature,
often above ten times its own magnitude.

As soon as the winter is past, in the first fine day in April, the ant hill,
that before seemed a desert, now swarms with new life, and myriads of these
insects are seen just awaked from their annual lethargy, and preparing for the
pleasures and fatigues of the season. For the first day they never offer to
leave the hill, which may be considered as their citadel, but run over every
part of it, as if to examine its present situation, to observe what injuries it
has sustained during the rigours of winter, Memoires pour servoir a l' Histoire
des insectes par Charles de Geer.
while they slept, and to mediate and settle the labors of the day ensuing.

At the first display of their forces, none but the wingless tribe appears,
while those furnished with wings remain at the bottom. These are the working
ants, that first appear, and that are always destitute of wings; the males and
females, that are furnished with four large wings each, are more slow in making
their appearance.

Thus, like bees, they are divided into males, females, and the neutral or the
working tribe. These are all easily distinguished from each other; the females
are much larger than the males; the working ants are the smallest of all. The
two former have wings; which, however, they sometimes are divested of; the
latter never have any, and upon them are devolved all the labors that tend to
the welfare of the community. The female, also, may be distinguished, by the
color and structure of her breast, which is a little more brown, than that of
the common ant, and a little brighter than that of the male.

In eight or ten days after their first appearance, the labors of the hill are
in some forwardness; the males and females are seen mixed with the working
multitude, and pursued or pursuing each other. They seem no way to partake in
the common drugeries of the state; the males pursue the females with great
assiduity, and in a manner, force them to compliance. They remain coupled for
some time, while the males thus united, suffer themselves to be drawn along by
the will of their partners.

In the mean time, the working body of the state take no part in their
pleasures, they are seen diligently going from the ant-hill, in pursuit of food
for themselves and their associates, and of proper materials for giving a
comfortable retreat to their young, or safety to their habitation. In the
fields of England, ant-hills are formed with but little apparent regularity. In
the more southern provinces of Europe, they are constructed with wonderful
contrivance, and offer a sight highly worthy a naturalist's curiosity. These
are generally formed in the neighborhood of some large tree and a stream of
water. The one is considered by the animals, as the proper place for getting
food; the other for supplying them with moisture, which they cannot well
dispense with. The shape of the ant-hill, is that of a sugar loaf, about three
feet high, composed of various substances; leaves, bits of wood, sand, earth,
bits of gum, and grains of corn. These are all united into a compact body,
perforated with galleries down to the bottom, and winding ways within the body
of the structure. From this retreat, to the water, as well as to the tree, in
different directions, there are many paths worn by constant assiduity, and
along these the busy insects are seen passing and repassing continually; so
that from May, or the beginning of June, according to the state of the season,
they work continually, till the bad weather comes on.

The chief employment of the working ants, is in sustaining not only the idlers
at home, but also finding a sufficiency of food for themselves. They live upon
various provisions, as well of the vegetable as of the animal kind. Small
insects they will kill and devour; sweets of all kinds, they are particularly
fond of. They seldom, however, think of their community, till they themselves
are first satiated. Having found a juicy fruit, they swallow what they can, and
then tearing it in pieces, carry home their load. If they meet with an insect
above their match, several of them will fall upon it at once, and having
mangled it, each will carry off a part of the spoil. If they meet, in their
excursions, any thing that is too heavy for one to bear, and yet, which they
are unable to divide, several of them will endeavor to force it along; some
dragging and others pushing. If any one of them happens to make a lucky
discovery, it will immediately give advice to others, and then at once, the
whole republic will put themselves in motion. If in these struggles, one of
them happens to be killed, some kind survivor will carry him off to a great
distance, to prevent the obstructions his body may give to the general spirit
of industry.

But while they are thus employed in supporting the state, in feeding abroad,
and carrying in provisions to those that continue at home, they are not
unmindful of posterity. After a few days of fine weather, the female ants begin
to lay their eggs, and those are as assiduously watched and protected by the
working ants, who take upon themselves to supply whatever is wanting to the
nascent animal's convenience or necessity. They are carried as soon as laid, to
the safest situation, at the bottom of their hill, where they are carefully
defended from cold and moisture. We are not to suppose, that those white
substances which we so plentifully find in every ant-hill, are the eggs as
newly laid. On the contrary, the ant's egg is so very small, that, though laid
upon a black ground, it can scarcely be discerned. The little white bodies we
see, are the young animals in their maggot state, endued with life, long since
freed from the egg, and often involved in a cone, which it has spun round
itself, like the silk worm. The real egg when laid, if viewed through a
microscope, appears smooth, polished and shining, while the maggot is seen
composed of twelve rings, and is oftener larger than the ant itself.

It is impossible to express the fond attachment which the working ants show to
their rising progeny. In cold weather they take them in their mouths, but
without offering them the smallest injury, to the very depths of their
habitation, where they are less subject to the severity of the season. In a
fine day they remove them, with the same care, nearer the surface, where their
maturity may be assisted by the warm beams of the sun. If a formidable enemy
should come to batter down their whole habitation, and crush them by thousands
in the ruin, yet these wonderful insects, still mindful of their parental
duties, make it their first care to save their offspring. They are seen running
wildly about and different ways, each loaded with a young one, often bigger
than the insect that supports it. I have kept, says Swammerdam, several of the
working ants in my closet, with their young, in a glass filled with earth. I
took pleasure in observing, that in proportion as the earth dried on the
surface, they dug deeper and deeper to deposite their eggs; and when I poured
water thereon, it was surprising to see with what care, affection, and
diligence they labored, to put their brood in safety, in the driest place. I
have seen also, that when water has been wanting for several days, and when the
earth was moistened after it a little, they immediately carried their young
ones to have a share, who seemed to enjoy and suck the moisture.

When the young maggot is come to its full growth, the breast swells
insensibly, it casts its skin, and loses all motion. All the members which were
hidden before, then begin to appear, an aurelia is formed, which represents
very distinctly, all the parts of the animal, though they are yet without
motion, and as it were, wrapped up in swaddling-cloaths. When at length, the
little insect has passed through all its changes, and acquired its proper
maturity, it bursts this last skin, to assume the form it is to retain ever
after. Yet this is not done by the efforts of the little animal alone, for the
old ones very assiduously break open, with their teeth, the covering in which
it is enclosed. Without this assistance the aurelia would never be able to get
free, as Mr. De Geer often found, who tried the experiment, by leaving the
aurelia to themselves. The old ones not only assist them, but know the very
precise time for lending their assistance, for if produced too soon the young
one dies of cold, if retarded too long it is suffocated in its prison.

When the female has done laying, and the whole brood is thus produced, her
labors, as well as that of the male, become unnecessary, and her wings, which
she had but a short time before so actively employed, drop off. What becomes of
her when thus divested of her ornaments is not well known, for she is seen in
the cells for some weeks after. The males, on the other hand, having no longer
any occupation at home, make use of those wings with which they have been
furnished by nature, and fly away, never to return, or to be heard of more. It
is probable they perish with the cold, or are devoured by the birds, which are
particularly fond of this petty prey.

In the mean time, the working ants having probably deposed their queens, and
being deserted by the males, that served but to clog the community, prepare for
the severity of the winter, and bury their retreats as deep in the earth as
they conveniently can. It is now found that the grains of corn, and other
substances with which they furnish their hill, are only meant as fences to keep
off the rigours of the weather, not as provisions to support them during its
continuance. It is found generally to obtain, that every insect that lives a
year after it is come to its full growth, is obliged to pass four or five
months without taking any nourishment, and will seem to be dead all that time.
It would be to no purpose therefore for ants to lay up corn for the winter,
since they lie that time without motion, heaped upon each other, and are so far
from eating, that they are utterly unable to stir. Thus what authors have
dignified by the name of a magazine, appears to be no more than a cavity, which
serves for a common retreat when the weather forces them to return to their
lethargic state.

What has been said with exaggeration of the European ant, is however true, if
asserted of those of the tropical climates. They build an ant-hill with great
contrivance and regularity, they lay up provisions, and, as they probably live
the whole year, they submit themselves to regulations entirely unknown among
the ants of Europe.

Those of Africa are of three kinds, the red, the green and the black; the
latter are above an inch long, and in every respect a most formidable insect.
Their sting produces extreme pain, and their depredations are sometimes
extremely destructive. They build an ant-hill of a very great size, from six to
twelve feet high; it is made of viscous clay, and tapers into a pyramidal form.
This habitation is constructed with great artifice, and the cells are so
numerous and even, that a honeycomb scarce exceeds them in number and
regularity.

The inhabitants of this edifice seem to be under a very strict regulation. At
the slightest warning they will sally out upon whatever disturbs them, and if
they have time to arrest their enemies, he is sure to find no mercy. Sheep,
hens, and even rats are often destroyed by these merciless insects, and their
flesh devoured to the bone. No anatomist in the world can strip a skeleton so
cleanly as they, and no animal, how strong soever, when they have once seized
upon it, has power to resist them.

It often happens that these insects quit their retreat in a body, and go in
quest of adventures. "During my stay," says Smith, "at Cape Corse Castle, a
body of these ants came to pay us a visit in our fortification. It was about
daybreak when the advanced guard of this famished crew entered the chapel,
where some negroe servants were asleep upon the floor. The men were quickly
alarmed at the invasion of this unexpected army, and prepared, as well as they
could, for a defense. While the foremost battalion of insects had already taken
possession of the place, the rear guard was more than a quarter of a mile
distant. The whole ground seemed alive and crawling with unceasing destruction.
After deliberating a few moments upon what was to be done, it was resolved to
lay a large train of gunpowder along the path they had taken, by this means
millions were blown to pieces, and the rear guard peceiving the destruction of
their leaders, thought proper instantly to return, and make back to their
original habitation."

The order which these ants observe, seems very extraordinary; whenever they
sally forth, fifty or sixty larger than the rest are seen to head the band, and
conduct them to their destined prey. If they have a fixed spot where their prey
continues to resort to, they then form a vaulted gallery, which is sometimes a
quarter of a mile in length, and yet, they will hollow it out in the space of
ten or twelve hours.

CHAP. VI. Of the Beetle and its Varieties.
HITHERTO we have been treating of insects with four transparent wings, we now
come to a tribe with two transparent wings, with cases that cover them close
while at rest, but which allow them their proper play when flying. The
principal of these are the Beetle, the May Bug, and the Cantharis. These are
all bred like the rest of their order, first from eggs, then they become grubs,
then a chrysalis in which the parts of the future fly are distinctly seen, and
lastly the animal leaves its prison, breaking forth as a winged animal in full
maturity.

Of the Beetle there are various kinds; all, however, concurring in one common
formation of having cases to their wings, which are the more necessary to those
insects, as they often live under the surface of the earth, in holes, which
they dig out by their own industry. These cases prevent the various injuries
their real wings might sustain, by rubbing or crushing against the sides of
their abode. These, though depiction of some types of beetles Beetles.
E. Martin sculp.
they do not assist flight, yet keep the internal wings clean and even, and
produce a loud buzzing noise, when the animal rises in the air.

If we examine the formation of all animals, of the beetle kind, we shall find,
as in shellfish, that their bones are placed externally, and their muscles
within. These muscles are formed very much like those of quadrupedes, and are
endued with such surprising strength, that bulk for bulk, they are a thousand
times stronger than those of a man. The strength of these muscles is of use in
digging the animal's subterraneous abode, where it is most usually hatched, and
to which it most frequently returns, even after it becomes a winged insect,
capable of flying.

Beside the difference which results from the shape and color of these
animals, the size also makes a considerable one; some beetles being not larger
than the head of a pin, while others, such as the elephant beetle, are as big
as ones fist: But the greatest difference among them is, that some are produced
in a month, and in a single season go through all the stages of their
existence, while others take near four years to their production; and live as
winged insects a year more. To give the history of all these animals, that are
bred pretty much in the same way, would be insipid and endless; it will suffice
to select one or two from the number, the origin of which may serve as
specimens of the rest. I will, therefore, offer the history of the may-bug to
the reader's attention; premising, that most other beetles, though not so long
lived, are bred in the same manner.

The may-bug, or dorr-beetle, as some call it, has, like all the rest, a pair
of cases to its wings, which are of a reddish brown color, sprinkled with a
whitish dust, which easily comes off. In some years their necks are seen
covered with a red plate, and in others, with a black; these, however, are
distinct sorts, and their difference is by no means accidental. The fore legs
are very short, and the better calculated for burrowing in the ground, where
this insect makes its retreat. It is well known for its evening buzz to
children; but till more formidably introduced to the acquaintance of husbandmen
and gardeners, for in some seasons, it has been found to swarm in such numbers,
as to eat up every vegetable production.

The two sexes in the may-bug, are easily distinguished from each other, by the
superior length of the tufts, at the end of the horns, in the male. They begin
to copulate in summer, and at that season, they are seen joined together for a
considerable time. The female being impregnated, quickly falls to boring a hole
into the ground, where to deposit her burden. This is generally about half a
foot deep, and in it the places her eggs, which are of an oblong shape, with
great regularity, one by the other. They are of a bright yellow color, and no
way wrapped up in a common covering, as some have imagined. When the female is
lightened of her burden, she again ascends from her hole, to live as before,
upon leaves and vegetables, to buzz in the summer evening, and to lie hid,
among the branches of trees, in the heat of the day.

In about three months after these eggs have been thus deposited in the earth,
the contained insect begins to break its shell, and a small grub or maggot
crawls forth, and feeds upon the roots of whatever vegetable it happens to be
nearest. All substances, of this kind, seem equally grateful, yet it is
probable the mother insect has a choice among what kind of vegetables she shall
deposit her young. In this manner these voracious creatures continue in the
worm state, for more than three years, devouring the roots of every plant they
approach, and making their way under ground, in quest of food, with great
dispatch and facility. At length they grow to above the size of a walnut, being
a great thick white maggot with a red head, which is seen most frequently in
new turned earth, and which is so eagerly sought after by birds of every
species. When largest, they are found an inch and an half long, of a whitish
yellow color, with a body consisting of twelve segments or joints, on each
side of which, there are nine breathing holes, and three red feet. The head is
large, in proportion to the body, of a reddish color, with a pincer before,
and a semi-circular lip, with which it cuts the roots of plants, and sucks out
their moisture. As this insect lives entirely under ground, it has no occasion
for eyes, and accordingly it is found to have none; but is furnished with two
feelers, which, like the crutch of a blind man, serve to direct its motions.
Such is the form of this animal, that lives for years in the worm state under
ground, still voracious, and every year changing its skin.

It is not till the end of the fourth year, that this extraordinary insect
prepares to emerge from its subterraneous abode, and even this is not effected,
but by a tedious preparation. About the latter end of autumn, the grub begins
to perceive the approaches of its transformation, it then buries itself deeper
and deeper in the earth, sometimes six feet beneath the surface, and there
forms itself a capacious apartment, the walls of which it renders very smooth
and shining, by the excretions of its body. Its abode being thus formed, it
begins soon after, to shorten itself, to swell, and to burst its last skin, in
order to assume the form of a chrysalis. This, in the beginning, appears of a
yellowish color, which heightens by degrees, till at last, it is seen nearly
red. Its exterior form plainly discovers all the vestiges of the future winged
insect, all the fore parts being distinctly seen; while behind, the animal
seems as if wrapped in swaddling clothes.

The young may-bug continues in this state for about three months longer, and
it is not till the beginning of January, that the aurelia divests itself of all
its impediments, and becomes a winged insect, completely formed. Yet still the
animal is far from attaining its natural strength, health, and appetite. It
undergoes a kind of infant imbecility, and unlike most other insects, that the
instant they become flies are arrived at their state of full perfection, the
may-bug continues feeble and sickly. Its color is much brighter than in the
perfect animal, all its parts are soft, and its voracious nature seems for a
while, to have entirely forsaken it. As the animal is very often found in this
state, it is supposed, by those unacquainted with its real history, that the
old ones, of the former season, have buried themselves for the winter, in order
to revisit the sun the ensuing summer. But the fact is, the old one never
survives the season but dies, like all the other winged tribe of insects, from
the severity of cold in winter.

About the latter end of May, these insects, after having lived for four years
under ground, burst from the earth, when the first mild evening invites them
abroad. They are at that time seen rising from their long imprisonment, from
living only upon roots, and imbibing only the moisture of the earth, to visit
the mildness of the summer air, to choose the sweetest vegetables for their
banquet, and to drink the dew of the evening. Wherever an attentive observer
then walks abroad, he will see them bursting up before him in his pathway, like
ghosts on a theater. He will see every part of the earth, that had its surface
beaten into hardness, perforated by their egression. When the season is
favorable for them, they are seen by myriads buzzing along, hitting against
every object that intercepts their flight. The midday sun, however, seems too
powerful for their constitutions; they then lurk under the leaves and branches
of some shady tree; but the willow seems particularly, their most favorite
food; there they lurk in clusters, and seldom quit the tree till they have
devoured all its verdure. In those seasons, which are favorable to their
propagation, they are seen in an evening as thick as flakes of snow, and
hitting against every object with a sort of capricious blindness. Their
duration, however, is but short, as they never survive the season. They begin
to join shortly after they have been let loose from their prison, and when the
female is impregnated, the cautiously bores a hole in the ground, with an
instrument fitted for that purpose, which the is furnished with at the tail,
and there deposits her eggs, generally to the number of threescore. If the
season and the soil be adapted to their propagation, these soon multiply as
already described, and go through their noxious stages of their contemptible
existence. This insect, however, in its worm state, though prejudicial to man,
makes one of the chief repasts of the feathered tribe, and is generally the
first nourishment with which they supply their young: Rooks, and hogs are
particularly fond of these worms, and devour them in great numbers. The
inhabitants of the county of Norfolk, some time since, went into the practice
of destroying their rookeries, but in proportion, as they destroyed one plague,
they were pestered with greater; and these insects multiplied in such an
amazing abundance, as to destroy not only the verdure of the fields, but even
the roots of vegetables, not yet shot forth. One farm in particular was so
injured by them in the year 1751, that the occupier was not able to pay his
rent, and the landlord was not only content to lose his income for that year,
but also gave money for the support of the farmer and his family. In Ireland
they suffered so much by these insects, that they came to a resolution of
setting fire to a wood, of some miles in extent, to prevent their mischievous
propagation.

Of all the beetle kind this is the most numerous, and therefore deserves the
chief attention of history. The numerous varieties of other kinds, might repay
the curiosity of the diligent observer, but we must be content in general to
observe, that in the great out-lines of the history, they resemble those of
which we have just been giving a description; like them, all other beetles are
bred from the egg, which is deposited in the ground, or sometimes, though seldom,
in the barks of trees, they change into a worm; they subsist in that state by
living upon the roots of vegetables, or the succulent parts of the bark round
them. They generally live a year at least before they change into an aurelia;
in that state they are, not entirely motionless, nor entirely swaddled up
without form.

It would be tedious and endless to give a description of all, and yet it would
be an unpardonable omission not to mention the particularities of some beetles,
which are singular rather from their size, their manners, or their formation.
That beetle which the Americans call the tumble-dung, particularly demands our
attention; it is all over of a dusky black, rounder than those animals are
generally found to be, and so strong, though not much larger than the common
black beetle, that if one of them be put under a brass candlestick, it will
cause it to move backwards and forwards, as if it were by an invisible hand, to
the admiration of those who are not accustomed to the sight; but this strength
is given it for much more useful purposes than those of exciting human
curiosity, for there is no creature more laborious, either in seeking
subsistence, or in providing a proper retreat for its young. They are endowed
with sagacity to discover subsistence by their excellent smelling, which
directs them in flights to excrements just fallen from man or beast, on which
they instantly drop, and fall unanimously to work in forming round balls or
pellets thereof, in the middle of which they lay an egg. These pellets, in
September, they convey three feet deep in the earth, where they lie till the
approach of spring, when the eggs are hatched and burnt their nests, and the
insects find their way out of the earth. They assist each other with
indefatigable industry, in rolling these globular pellets to the place where
they are to be buried. This they are to perform with the tail foremost, by
raising up their hinder part, and shoving along the ball with their hind-feet.
They are always accompanied with other beetles of a larger size, and of a more
elegant structure and color. The breast of this is covered with a shield of a
crimson color, and shining-like metal; the head is of the like color, mixed
with green, and on the crown of the head stands a shining black horn, bended
backwards. These are called the kings of the beetles, but for what reason is
uncertain, since they partake of the same dirty drudgery with the rest.

The Elephant-beetle is the largest of this kind hitherto known, and is found
in South-America, particularly Guiana and Surinam, as well as about the river
Oroonoko. It is of a black color, and the whole body is covered with a very
hard shell, full as thick and as strong as that of a small crab. Its length,
from the hinder part to the eyes, is almost four inches, and from the same part
to the end of the proboscis, or trunk, four inches and three quarters. The
transverse diameter of the body is two inches and a quarter, and the breadth of
each elytron, or case for the wings, is an inch and three tenths. The antennae
or feelers, are quite horny; for which reason the proboscis or trunk is
moveable at its insertion into the head, and seems to supply the place of
feelers. The horns are eight tenths of an inch long, and terminate in points.
The proboscis is an inch and a quarter long, and turns upwards, making a
crooked line, terminating in two horns, each of which is near a quarter of an
inch long; but they are not perforated at the end like the proboscis of other
insects. About four tenths of an inch above the head, or that side next the
body, is a prominence, or small horn, which if the rest of the trunk were away,
would cause this part to resemble the horn of a rhinoceros. There is indeed a
beetle so called, but then the horns or trunk has no fork at, the end, though
the lower horn resembles this. The feet are all forked at the end, but not like
lobsters claws.

To this class we may also refer the glowworm, that little animal which makes
such a distinguished figure in the descriptions of our poets. No two insects
can differ more than the male and female of this species from each other. The
male is in every respect a beetle, having cases to its wings, and rising in the
air at pleasure; the female, on the contrary has none, but is entirely a
creeping insect, and is obliged to wait the approaches of her capricious
companion. The body of the female has eleven joints, with a shield
breast plate, the shape of which is oval; the head is placed over this, and is
very small, and the three last joints of her body are of a yellowish color;
but what distinguishes it from all other animals, at least in this part of the
world, is the shining light which it emits by night, and which is supposed by
force philosophers, to be an emanation which she sends forth to allure the male
to her company. Most travelers who have gone through sandy countries, must
well remember the little shining sparks with which the ditches are studded on
each side of the road. If incited by curiosity to approach more nearly, he will
find the light sent forth by the glowworm; if he should keep the little animal
for some time, its light continues to grow paler, and at last appears totally
extinct: The manner in which this light is produced has hitherto continued
inexplicable; it is probable the little animal is supplied with some electrical
powers, so that by rubbing the joints of its body against each other, it thus
supplies a stream of light which if it allures the male, as we are told, serves
for very useful purposes.

The cantharis is of the beetle kind, from whence come cantharides, well known
in the chops by the name of Spanish flies, and for their use in blisters. They
have feelers like bristles, flexible cases to the wings, a breast pretty plain,
and the sides of the belly wrinkled. Cantharides differ from each other in
their size, shape, and color, those used in the shops also do the same. The
largest in these parts are about an inch long, and as much in circumference,
but others are not above three quarters of an inch. Some are of a pure azure
color, others of pure gold, and others again, have a mixture of pure gold and
azure colors; but they are all very brilliant, and extremely beautiful. These
insects, as is well known, are of the greatest benefit to mankind, making a
part in many medicines conducive to human preservation. They are chiefly
natives of Spain, Italy, and Portugal; but they are to be met with also about
Paris in the summer time, upon the leaves of the ash, the poplar, and the
rose-trees, and also among wheat, and in meadows. It is very certain, that
these insects are fond of ash leaves, insomuch that they will sometimes strip
one of these trees quite bare. Some affirm, that these flies delight in
sweet smelling herbs, and it is very certain, that they are fond of
honey-suckles, liloc, and wild-cherry shrubs; but some that have sought after
them declare, they never could find them on elder-trees, nut-trees, and among
wheat. We are told, that the country people expect the return of these insects
every seven years. It is very certain, that such a number of these insects have
been seen together in the air, that they appeared like swarms of bees; and that
they have so disagreeable a smell, that it may be perceived a great way off,
especially about sunset, though they are not seen at that time. This bad smell
is a guide for those who make it their business to catch them. When they are
caught they dry them, after which they are so light, that fifty will hardly
weigh a dram. Those that gather them, tie them in a bag, or a piece of linen
cloth, that has been well worn, and then they kill them with the vapors of hot
vinegar; after which they dry them in the sun, and keep them in boxes. These
flies, thus dried, being chymically analyzed, yield a great deal of volatile
caustic-salt, mixed with a little oil, phlegm and earth. Cantharides are
penetrating, corrosive, and applied to the skin, raise blisters, from whence
proceeds a great deal of serosity. They are made use of both inwardly and
outwardly. However it is somewhat strange that the effects of these flies
should fall principally upon the urinary passages, for though some authors have
endeavored to account for this, we are mill in the dark, for all they have
said amounts to no more, than that they affect these parts in a manner which
may be very learnedly described, but very obscurely comprehended.

An insect of great, though perhaps not equal use in medicine, is that which is
known by the name of the kermes; it is produced in the excrescence of an oak,
called the berry-bearing ilex, and appears at first wrapped up in a membranaceous
bladder, of the size of a pea, smooth and shining of a brownish red color, and
covered with a very fine ash-colored powder. This bag teems with a number of
reddish eggs or insects, which being rubbed with the fingers pour out a crimson
liquor. It is only met with in warm countries in the months of May and June. In
the month of April this insect becomes of the size and shape of a pea, and its
eggs some time after burst from the womb, and soon turning worms, run about the
branches and leaves of the tree. They are of two sexes, and the females have
been hitherto described; but the males are very distinct from the former, and
are a sort of small flies like gnats, with six feet, of which the four forward
are short, and the two backward long, divided into four joints, and armed with
three crooked nails. There are two feelers on the head, a line and a half long,
which are moveable, streaked and articulated. The tail, at the back part of the
body, is half a line long, and forked. The whole body is covered with two
transparent wings, and they leap about in the manner of fleas. The harvest of
the kermes is greater or less in proportion to the severity of the winter, and
the women gather them before sunrising, tearing them off with their nails; for
fear there should be any loss from the hatching of the insects. They sprinkle
them with vinegar, and lay them in the sun to dry, where they acquire a red
color.

An insect, perhaps, still more useful than, either of the former, is the
cochineal, which has been very variously described by authors; some have
supposed it a vegetable excrescence from the tree upon which it is found; some
have described it as a louse, some as a bug, and some as a beetle. As they
appear in our shops when brought from America, they are of an irregular shape,
unequal on one side, and a little concave on the other; but are both marked with
transverse streaks or wrinkles. They are of a scarlet color within, and
without of a blackish red, and sometimes of a white, reddish, or ash color,
which are accounted the best, and are brought to us from Mexico. The cochineal
insect is of an oval form, of the size of a small pea, with six feet, and a
snout or trunk. It brings forth its young alive, and is nourished by sucking
the juice of the plant. Its body consists of several rings, and when it is once
fixed on the plant, it continues immovable, being subject to no change. Some
pretend there are two sorts, the one domestic, which is best, and the other
wild, that is of a vivid color; however they appear to be the same, only with
this difference, that the Wild feeds upon uncultivated trees, without any
assistance, whereas the domestic is carefully at a stated season, removed to
cultivated trees, where it feeds upon a purer juice. Those who take care of
these insects, place them on the prickly pear plant in a certain order, and are
very industrious in defending them from other insects; for if any other kind
come among them, they take care to brush them off with foxes tails. Toward the
end of the year, when the rains and cold weather are coming on, which are fatal
to these insects, they take off the leaves or branches covered with cochineal,
that have not attained their utmost degree of perfection, and keep them in
their houses till winter is past. These leaves are very thick and juicy, and
supply them with sufficient nourishment, while they remain within doors. When
the milder weather returns, and these animals are about to exclude their young,
the natives make them nests, like those of birds, but less, of tree-moss, or
soft hay, or the down of cocoa-nuts, placing twelve in every nest. These they
fix on the thorns of the prickly pear-plant, and in three or four days time
they bring forth their young, which leave their nests in a few days, and creep
upon the branches of the plant, till they find a proper place to rest in, and
take in their nourishment; and until the females are secundated by the males,
which, as in the former tribe, differ very widely, from the females being
winged insects, whereas the others only creep, and are at most stationary. When
they are impregnated, they produce a new offspring, so that the propagator has
a new harvest thrice a year. When the native Americans have gathered the
cochineal, they put them into holes in the ground, where they kill them with
boiling water, and afterward dry them in the sun, or in an oven, or lay them
upon hot plates. From the various methods of killing them, arise the different
colors which they appear in when brought to us. While they are living, they
seem to be sprinkled over with a white powder, which they lose as soon as the
boiling water is poured upon them. Those that are dried upon hot places are the
blackest. What we call the cochineal are only the females, for the males are a
sort of fly as already observed in the kermes. They are used both for dyeing
and medicine, and are said to have much the same virtue as the kermes, though
they are now seldom used alone, but are mixed with other things for the sake of
the color.

I shall end this account of the beetle tribe with the history of an animal
which cannot properly be ranked under this species, and yet which cannot be
more methodically ranged under any other. This is the insect that forms and
resides in the gall-nut, the spoils of which are converted to such useful
purposes. The gall insects are bred in a sort of bodies adhering to a kind of
oak in Asia, which differ with regard to their color, size, roughness,
smoothness and shape, and which we call galls. They are not fruit, as some have
imagined, but preternatural tumors, owing to the wounds given to the buds,
leaves, and twigs of the tree, by a kind of insects that lay their eggs within
them. This animal is furnished with an implement, by which the female
penetrates into the bark of the tree, or into that spot which just begins to
bud, and there sheds a drop of corrosive fluid into the cavity. Having thus
formed a receptacle for her eggs, she deposites them in the place, and dies
soon after. The heart of the bud being thus wounded, the circulation of the
nutritive juice is interrupted and the fermentation thereof, with the poison
injected by the fly, burns the parts adjacent, and then alters the natural
color of the plant. The juice or sap turned bark from its natural course,
extravasates and flows round the egg. After which it swells and dilates by the
assistance of some bubbles of air, which get admission through the pores of the
bark, and which run in the vessels with the sap. The external coat of this
excrescence is dried by the air, and grows into a figure which bears some
resemblance to the bow of an arch, or the roundness of a kernel. This little
ball receives its nutriment, growth and vegetation as the other parts of the
tree by slow degrees, and is what we call the gall-nut. The worm that is
hatched under this spacious vault, finds in the substance of the ball, which is
as yet very tender, a subsistence suitable to its nature; gnaws and digests it
till the time comes for its transformation to a nymph, and from that state of
existence changes into a fly. After this the insect, perceiving itself duly
provided with all things requisite, disengages itself soon from its
confinement, and takes its flight into the open air. The case however, is not
similar with respect to the gall-nut, that grows in autumn. The cold weather
frequently comes on before the worm is transformed into a fly, or before the
fly can pierce through its enclosure. The nut falls with the leaves, and although
you may imagine that the fly which lies within is lost, yet in reality it is
not so; on the contrary, its being covered up so close, is the means of its
preservation. Thus it spends the winter in a warm house, where every crack and
cranny of the nut is well stopped up; and lies buried as it were under a heap
of leaves, which preserves it from the injuries of the weather. This apartment,
however, though so commodious a retreat in the winter, is a perfect prison in the
spring. The fly, rouzed out of its lethargy by the first heats, breaks its way
through, and ranges where it pleases. A very small aperture is sufficient since
at this time the fly is but a diminutive creature. Besides, the ringlets
whereof its body is composed, dilate, and become pliant is the passage.

CHAP. VII. Of the Gnat and the Tipula.
THERE are two insects which entirely resemble each other in their form, and
yet widely differ in their habits, manners and propagation. Those who have seen
the tipula, or long-legs, and the larger kind of gnat, have most probably
mistaken the one for the other, they have often accused the tipula, a harmless
insect, of depredations made by the gnat, and the innocent have suffered for
the guilty; indeed the differences in their form are so very minute, that it
often requires the assistance of a microscope to distinguish the one from the
other: they are both mounted on long legs, both furnished with two wings and a
slender body; their heads are large, and they seem to be hump-backed; the chief
and only difference, therefore, is, that the tipula wants a trunk, while the
gnat has a large one, which it often exerts to very mischievous purposes. The
tipula is a harmless peaceful insect, that offers injury to nothing; the gnat
is sanguinary and predaceous, ever seeking out for a place in which to bury its
trunk, and pumping up the blood from the animal in large quantities.

The gnat proceeds from a little worm, which is usually seen at the bottom of
standing waters. The manner in which the insect lays its eggs is particularly
curious; after having laid the proper number on the surface of the water, it
surrounds them with a kind of unctuous matter, which prevents them from
sinking; but at the same time fastens them with a thread to the bottom, to
prevent their floating away, at the mercy of every breeze, from a place the
warmth of which is proper for their production, to any other, where the water
may be too cold, or the animals its enemies too numerous. Thus the insects, in
their egg state, resemble a buoy, which is fixed by an anchor. As they come to
maturity they sink deeper, and at last, when they leave the egg as worms they
creep at the bottom. They now make themselves lodgments of cement, which they
fasten to some solid body at the very bottom of the water, unless, by accident,
they meet with a piece of chalk, which being of a soft and pliant nature, gives
them an opportunity of sinking a retreat for themselves, where nothing but the
claws of a cray-fish can possibly molest them. The worm afterward changes its
form. It appears with a large head, and a tail invested with hair, and
moistened with an oleaginous liquor, which she makes use of as a cork, to
sustain her head in the air, and her tail in the water, and to transport her
from one place to another. When the oil with which her tail is moistened begins
to grow dry, she discharges out of her mouth an unctuous humor, which she
sheds all over her tail, by virtue whereof, she is enabled to-transport herself
where she pleases, without being either wet or any ways incommoded by the
water. The gnat, in her second state, is properly speaking, in her form of a
nymph, which is an introduction, or entrance into a new life. In the first
place, the diverts herself of her second skin; in the next she resigns her
eyes, her antennae, and her tail; in short, she actually seems to expire.
However, from the spoils of the amphibious animal, a little winged insect cuts
the air, whose every part is active to the last degree, and whose whole
structure is the just object of our admiration. Its little head is adorned with
a plume of feathers, and its whole body invested with scales and hair, to
secure it from any wet or dust. She makes trial of the activity of her wings,
by rubbing them either against her body, or her broad side-bags, which keep her
in an equilibrium. The furbelow, or little border of fine feathers, which
graces her wings is very curious, and strikes the eye in the most agreeable
manner. There is nothing, however, of greater importance to the gnat, than her
trunk, and that weak implement may justly be deemed one of nature's
masterpieces. It is so very small, that the extremity of it can scarcely be
discerned through the best microscope that can be procured. That part which is
at first obvious to the eye, is nothing but a long scaly sheath under the
throat. At near the distance of two thirds of it, there is an aperture, through
which the insect darts out four stings, and afterward retracts them. One of
which, however sharp and active it may be, is no more than the case in which
the other three lie concealed, and run in a long groove. The sides of these
stings are sharpened like two-edged swords; they are likewise barbed, and have
a vast number of cutting teeth toward the point, which turns up like a hook,
and is fine beyond expression. When all these darts are stuck into the flesh of
animals, sometimes one after another, and sometimes all at once, the blood and
humors of the adjacent parts must unavoidably be extravasated; upon which a
tumor must consequently ensue, the little orifice whereof is closed up by the
compression of the external air. When the gnat, by the point of her case, which
she makes use of as a tongue, has tasted any fruit, flesh, or juice, that she
has found out; if it be a fluid, she sucks it up, without playing her darts
into it; but in case she finds the least obstruction by any flesh whatever, she
exerts her strength, and pierces through it, if possibly she can. After this
she draws back her stings into their sheath, which she applies to the wound in
order to extract, as through a reed, the juices which she finds enclosed. This
is the implement with which the gnat performs her work in the summer, for
during the winter the has no manner of occasion for it. Then she ceases to eat,
and spends all that tedious season either in quarries or in caverns, which she
abandons at the return of summer, and flies about in search after some
commodious ford, or standing water, where she may produce her progeny, which
would be soon washed away and lost, by the too rapid motion of any running
stream. The little brood are sometimes so numerous, that the very water is
tinged according to the color of the species, as green, if they be green, and
of a sanguine hue, if they be red.

These are circumstances sufficiently extraordinary in the life of this little
animal, but it offers something still more curious in the method of its
propagation. However similar insects of the gnat kind are in their appearance,
yet they differ widely from each other in the manner in which they are brought
forth, for some are oviparous, and are produced from eggs, some are viviparous,
and come forth in their most perfect form; some are males, and unite with the
female; some are females, requiring the impregnation of the male; some are of
neither sex, yet still produce young, without any copulation whatsoever. This
is one of the strangest discoveries in all natural history! A gnat separated
from the rest of its kind, and enclosed in a glass vessel, with air sufficient
to keep it alive, shall produce young, which also, when separated from each
other, shall be the parents of a numerous progeny. Thus, down for five or six
generations do these extraordinary animals propagate without the use of
copulation, without any congress between the male and female, but in the manner
of vegetables, the young bursting from the body of their parents, without any
previous impregnation. At the sixth generation however, their propagation
stops, the gnat no longer produces its like, from itself alone, but it requires
the access of the male to give it another succession of secundity.

The gnat of Europe gives but little uneasiness; it is sometimes heard to hum
about our beds at night, and keeps off the approaches of sleep by the
apprehension it causes; but it is very different in the ill-peopled regions of
America, where the waters stagnate, and the climate is warm, and where they are
produced in multitudes beyond expression. The whole air is there filled with
clouds of those famished insects; and they are found of all sizes, from six
inches long, to a minuteness that even requires the microscope to have a
distinct perception of them. The warmth of the midday sun is too powerful for
their constitutions; but when the evening approaches, neither art nor flight
can shield the wretched inhabitants from their attacks, though millions are
destroyed, still millions more succeed, and produce unceasing torment. The
native Indians, who anoint their bodies with oil, and who have from their
infancy been used to their depredations, find them much less inconvenient than
those who are newly arrived from Europe; they sleep in their cottages covered
all over with thousands of the gnat kind upon their bodies, and yet do not seem
to have their slumbers interrupted by their cruel devourers. If a candle
happens to be lighted in one of those places, a cloud of insects at once light
upon the flame, and extinguish it; they are therefore obliged to keep their
candles in glass lanthorns; a miserable expedient to prevent an unceasing
calamity.

PART V.
CHAP. VIII. Of Zoophytes in General.
WE are now come to the last link in the chain of animated nature, to a class
of beings so confined in their powers, and so defective in their formation,
that some historians have been at a loss whether to consider them as a superior
rank of vegetables, or the humblest order of the animated tribe. In order
therefore to give them a denomination, agreeable to their existence, they have
been called Zoophytes, a name implying vegetable nature endued with animal
life; and indeed, in some the marks of the animal are so few, that it is
difficult to give their place in nature with precision, or to tell whether it
is a plant or an insect that is the object of our consideration.

Should it be asked what it is that constitutes the difference between animal
and vegetable life, what it is that lays the line that separates those two
great kingdoms from each other, it would be difficult, perhaps we should find
it impossible, to return an answer. The power of motion cannot form this
distinction, since some vegetables are possessed of motion, and many animals are
totally without it. The sensitive plant has obviously a greater variety of
motions than the oyster or the pholas. The animal that fills the acorn-shell is
immovable, and can only close its lid to defend itself from external injury,
while the flower, which goes by the name of the fly-trap, seems to close upon
the flies that light upon it, and that attempt to rifle it of its honey. The
animal in this instance, seems to have scarce a power of self defense; the
vegetable not only guards its possessions, but seizes upon the robber that
would venture to invade them. In like manner, the methods of propagation give
no superiority to the lower rank of animals. On the contrary, vegetables are
frequently produced more conformably to the higher ranks of the creation, and
though some plants are produced by cuttings from others, yet the general manner
of propagation is from seeds, laid in the womb of the earth, where they are
hatched into the similitude of the parent plant or flower. But a most numerous
tribe of animals have lately been discovered, which are propagated by cuttings,
and this in so extraordinary a manner, that, though the original insect be
divided into a thousand parts, each, however small, shall be formed into an
animal, entirely resembling that which was at first divided; in this respect,
therefore, certain races of animals seem to fall beneath vegetables, by their
more imperfect propagation.

What, therefore, is the distinction between them, or are the orders so
intimately blended as that it is impossible to mark the boundaries of each? To
me it would seem, that all animals are possessed of one power, of which
vegetables are totally deficient; I mean either the actual ability, or an
awkward attempt at self-preservation. However vegetables may seem possessed of
this important quality, yet it is with them but a mechanical impulse,
resembling the raising one end of the lever, when you depress the other: the
sensitive plant contracts and hangs its leaves, indeed, when touched, but this
motion no way contributes to its safety; the fly-trap flower acts entirely in
the same manner; and though it seems to seize the little animal, that comes to
annoy it, yet, in reality, only closes mechanically upon it, and this enclosure
neither contributes to its preservation nor its defense. But it is very
different with insects, even of the lowest order; the earth-worm not only
contracts, but hides itself in the earth, and escapes with force share of
swiftness from its pursuers. The polypus hides its horns; the star-fish
contracts its arms, upon the appearance even of distant dangers; they not only
hunt for their food, but provide for their safety, and however imperfectly they
may be formed, yet still they are in reality, placed many degrees above the
highest vegetable of the earth, and are possessed of many animal functions, as
well as those that are more elaborately formed.

But though these be superior to plants, they are very far beneath their
animated fellows of existence. In the class of zoophytes, we may place all
those animals, which may be propagated by cuttings, or in other words, which,
if divided into two or more parts, each part in time, becomes a separate and
perfect animal; the head shoots forth a tail, and on the contrary, the tail
produces a head; some of these will bear dividing, but into two parts, such is
the earth-worm; some may be divided into more than two, and of this kind are
many of the star fish; others still may be cut into a thousand parts, each
becoming a perfect animal; they may be turned inside out, like the finger of a
glove, they may be molded into all manner of shapes, yet still their vivacious
principle remains, still every single part becomes perfect in its kind, and
after a few days existence, exhibits all the arts and industry of its
contemptible parent! We shall, therefore, divide zoophytes according to their
several degrees of perfection, namely, into worms, star-fish and polypi;
contenting ourselves with a short review of those nauseous and despicable
creatures, that excite our curiosity chiefly by their imperfections; it must
not be concealed, however, that much has of late been written on this part of
natural history. A new mode of animal production, could not fail of exciting
not only the curiosity, but the astonishment of every philosopher; many found
their favorite systems totally overthrown by the discovery, and it was not
without a wordy struggle, that they gave up what had formerly been their
pleasure and their pride. At last, however, conviction became too strong for
argument, and a question, which owed its general spread rather to its novelty,
than to its importance, was given up in favor of the new discovery.

CHAP. IX. Of Worms.
THE first in the class of zoophytes, are animals of the worm kind, which being
entirely destitute of feet, trail themselves along upon the ground, and find
themselves a retreat under the earth, or in the water. As these, like serpents,
have a creeping motion, so both, in general, go under the common appellation of
reptiles; a loathsome, noxious, malignant tribe, to which man by nature, as
well as by religion, has the strongest antipathy. But though worms, as well as
serpents, are mostly without feet, and have been doomed to creep along the
earth on their bellies, yet their motions are very different. The serpent, as
has been said before, having a back bone, which it is incapable of contracting,
bends its body into the form of a bow, and then shoots forward from the tail;
but it is very different with the worm, which has a power of contracting or
lengthening itself at will. There is a spiral muscle, that runs round its whole
body, from the head to tail, somewhat resembling a wire wound round a
walking-cane, which, when slipped off, and one end extended and held fast, will
bring the other nearer to it; in this manner the earth-worm, having shot out,
or extended its body, takes hold by the slime of the fore part of its body, and
so contracts and brings forward the hinder part; in this manner it moves
onward, not without great effort, but the occasions for its progressive motion
are few.

As it is designed for living under the earth, and leading a life of obscurity,
so it seems tolerably adapted to its situation. Its body is armed with small
stiff sharp burrs or prickles, which it can erect or depress at pleasure; under
the skin there lies a slimy juice, to be ejected as occasion requires, at
certain perforations, between the rings of the musces, to lubricate its body,
and facilitate its passage into the earth. Like most other insects, it has
breathing-holes along the back, adjoining each ring; but it is without bones,
without eyes, without ears, and, properly without feet. It has a mouth, and
also an elementary canal, which runs along to the very point of the tail. In
some worms, however, particularly such as are found in the bodies of animals,
this canal opens toward the middle of the belly, at some distance from the
tail. The intestines of the earth-worm, are always found filled with a very
fine earth, which seems to be the only nourishment these animals are capable of
receiving.

The animal is entirely without brain, but near the head is placed the heart,
which is seen to beat with a very distinct motion, and round it are the
spermatic vessels, forming a number of little globules, containing a milky
fluid, which have an opening into the belly, not far from the head: they are
also often found to contain a number of eggs, which are laid in the earth, and
are hatched in twelve or fourteen days into life, by the genial warmth of their
situation; like snails, all these animals unite in themselves, both sexes at
once, the reptile that impregnates, being impregnated in turn; few that walk
out, but must have observed them, with their heads laid against each other, and
so strongly attached, that they suffer themselves to be trod upon.

When the eggs are laid in the earth, which, in about fourteen days, as has
been said, are hatched into maturity, the young ones come forth very small, but
perfectly formed, and suffer no change during their existence: how long their
life continues is not well known, but it certainly holds for more than two or
three seasons. During the winter, they bury themselves deeper in the earth, and
seem, in some measure, to share the general torpidity of the insect tribe. In
spring, they revive with the rest of nature, and on those occasions, a moist or
dewy evening brings them forth from their retreats, for the universal purpose
of continuing their kind. They chiefly live in a light rich and fertile soil,
moistened by dews or accidental showers, but avoid those places where the water
is apt to lie on the surface of the earth, or where the clay is too stiff for
their easy progression under ground.

Helpless as they are formed, yet they seem very vigilant in avoiding those
animals that chiefly make them their prey; in particular, the mole, who feeds
entirely upon them beneath the surface, and who seldom ventures, from the
dimness of its sight, into the open air; him they avoid, by darting up from the
earth, the instant they feel the ground move; and fishermen, who are well
acquainted with this, take them in what numbers they choose, by stirring the
earth where they expect to find them. They are also driven from their retreats
under ground, by pouring bitter or acrid water thereon, such as that water in
which green walnuts have been steeped, or a lie made of potashes.

Such is the general outline of the history of these reptiles, which, as it
should seem, degrades them no way beneath the rank of other animals of the
insect creation; but we now come to a part of their history, which proves the
imperfection of their organs, from the easiness with which these little
machines may be damaged and repaired again. It is well known in mechanics, that
the finest and most complicated instruments are the most easily put out of
order, and the most difficultly set right; the same also obtains in the animal
machine. Man, the most complicated machine of all others, whose nerves are more
numerous, and powers of action more various, is most easily destroyed: he is
seen to die under wounds which a quadruped or a bird could easily survive; and
as we descend gradually to the lower ranks, the ruder the composition, the more
difficult it is to disarange it. Some animals live without their limbs, and
often are seen to reproduce them; some are seen to live without their brain for
many weeks together; caterpillars continue to increase and grow large, though all
their nobler organs are entirely destroyed within; some animals continue to
exist, though cut in two, their nobler parts preserving life, while the others
perish that were cut away; but the earth worm, and all the zoophyte tribe,
continue to live in separate parts, and one animal, by the means of cutting, is
divided into two distinct existences, sometimes into a thousand.

There is no phenomenon in all natural history more astonishing than this,
that man, at pleasure, should have a kind of creative power, and out of one
life make two, each completely formed, with all its apparatus and functions,
each with its perceptions, and powers of motion and self-preservation, each as
complete in all respects as that from which it derived its existence, and
equally enjoying the humble gratifications of its nature.

When De Carts first started the opinion, that brutes were machines, the
discovery of this surprising propagation was unknown, which might, in some
measure, have strengthened his fanciful theory. What is life, in brutes, he
might have said, or where does it reside? In some we find it so diffused, that
every part seems to maintain a vivacious principle, and the same animal appears
possessed of a thousand distinct irrational souls at the same time. But let us
not, he would say, give so noble a name to such contemptible powers, but rank
the vivifying principle in these with the sap that rises in vegetables, or the
moisture that contracts a cord, or the heat that puts water into motion!
Nothing, in fact, deserves the name of soul, but that which reasons, that which
understands, and by knowing God, receives the mark of its currency, and is
minted with the impression of its great Creator.

Sucb might have been the speculations of this philosopher, however to leave
theory, it will be sufficient to say that we owe the first discovery of this
power of reproduction in animals to Mr. Trembley, who first observed it in the
polypus, and after him, Spalanzani and others found it taking place in the
earth-worm, the sea-worm, and several other ill-formed animals of a like kind,
which were susceptible of this new mode of propagation. This last philosopher,
has tried several experiments upon the earth-worm, many of which succeeded
according to his expectation; every earth-worm, however, did not retain the
vivacious principle with the same obstinacy; some, when cut in two, were
entirely destroyed; others survived only in the nobler part; and while the head
was living the tail entirely perished, and a new one was seen to burge on from
the extremity. But what was most surprising of all, in some, particularly in
the small red-headed earth worm, both extremities survived the operation; the
head produced a tail with the anus, the intestines, the anular muscles, and the
prickly beards; the tail part, on the other hand, was seen to shoot forth the
nobler organs, and in less than the space of three months sent forth a head,
heart, with all the apparatus and instruments of generation. This part, as may
easily be supposed, was produced much more slowly than the former, a new head
taking above three or four months for its completion, a new tail being shot
forth in less than as many weeks. Thus two animals, by dissection, were made
out of one, each with their separate appetites, each endued with life and
motion, and seemingly as perfect as that single animal from whence they derived
their origin.

What was performed upon the earth-worm, was found to obtain also in many other
of the vermicular species. The sea-worm, the white water-worm, and many of
those little worms with feelers, found at the bottom of dirty ditches; in all
these the nobler organs are of such little use, that if taken away, the animal
does not seem to feel the want of them; it lives in all its parts, and in every
part, and by a strange paradox in nature, the most useless and contemptible
life is of all others the most difficult to destroy.

CHAP. X. Of the Star-fish.
THE next order of zoophytes is that of the star fish, a numerous tribe,
shapeless and deformed, assuming at different times different appearances. The
same animal that now appears round like a ball, shortly after flattens as thin
as a plate. All of this kind are formed of a semi-transparent gelatinous
substance, covered with a thin membrane, and, to an inattentive spectator,
often appear like a lump of inanimate jelly, floating at random upon the
surface of the sea, or thrown by chance on shore at the departure of the tide.
But upon a more minute inspection, they will be found possessed of life and
motion; they will be found to shoot forth their arms in every direction, in
order to seize upon such insects as are near, and to devour them with great
rapacity. Worms, the spawn of fish, and even muscles themselves, with their
hard resisting shell, have been found in the stomachs of these voracious
animals; and what is very extraordinary, though the substance of their own bodies
be almost as soft as water, yet they are no way injured by swallowing depiction
of the cuttlefish, the sea star [starfish], and the sea nettle [type of
jellyfish] The Cuttle Fish. 1 The Sea Star. 2 The Sea Nettle.

E. Martin sculp.
these shells, which are almost of a stony hardness. They increase in size as
all other animals do. In summer, when the water of the sea is warmed by the
heat of the sun, they float upon the surface, and in the dark they send forth a
kind of shining light resembling that of phosphorus. Some have given these
animals the name of sea-nettles, because they burn the hands of those that
touch them, as nettles are found to do. They are often seen fastened to the
rocks, and to the largest sea-shells, as if to derive their nourishment from
them. If they be taken and put into spirit of wine, they will continue for many
years entire, but if they be left to the influence of the air, they are, in
less than four and twenty hours melted down into a limpid and offensive water.

In all of this species, none are found to possess a vent for their excrements,
but the same passage by which they devour their food, serves for the ejection
of their faeces. These animals as was said, take such a variety of figures,
that it is impossible to describe them under one determinate shape; but in
general, their bodies resemble a truncated cone, whose base is applied to the
rock to which they are found usually attached. Though generally transparent, yet
they are found of different colors, some inclining to green, some to red, some
to white, and some to brown. In some, their colors appear diffused over the
whole surface, in some, they are often streaked, and in others often spotted.
They are possessed of a very slow progressive motion, and in fine weather, they
are continually seen, stretching out and fishing for their prey. Many of them
are possessed of a number of long slender filaments, in which they entangle any
small animals they happen to approach, and thus draw them into their enormous
stomachs, which fill the whole cavity of their bodies. The harder shells
continue for some weeks indigested, but at length, they undergo a kind of
maceration in the stomach, and become a part of the substance of the animal
itself. The indigestible parts, are returned by the same aperture by which they
were swallowed, and then the star-fish begins to fish for more. These also may
be cut in pieces, and every part will survive the operation; each becoming a
perfect animal, endued with its natural rapacity. Of this tribe, the number is
various, and the description of each would be tedious and uninstructing; the
manners and nature of all, are nearly as described; but I will just make
mention of one creature, which, though not properly belonging to this class, yet
is so nearly related, that the passing it in silence would be an unpardonable
omission.

Of all other animals, the cuttle-fish, though in some respect superior to this
tribe, possesses qualities the most extraordinary. It is about two feet long,
covered with a very thin skin, and its flesh composed of a gelatinous
substance, which however within side is strengthened by a strong bone, of which
such great use is made by the goldsmiths. It is possessed of eight arms, which
it extends, and which are probably of service to it in fishing for its prey;
while in life, it is capable of lengthening or contracting these at pleasure;
but when dead, they contract and lose their rigidity. They feed upon small
fish, which they seize with their arms; and they are bred from eggs, which are
laid upon the weeds along the seashore.

The cuttle fish is found along many of the coasts of Europe, but are not
easily caught, from a contrivance with which they are furnished by nature; this
is a black substance, of the color of ink, which is contained in a bladder
generally on the left-side of the belly, and which is ejected in the manner of
an excrement from the anus. Whenever therefore this fish is pursued, and when
it finds a difficulty of escaping, it spurts forth a great quantity of this
black liquor, by which the waters are totally darkened, and then it escapes, by
lying close at the bottom. In this manner the creature finds its safety, and
men find ample cause for admiration, from the great variety of stratagems with
which creatures are endued for their peculiar preservation.

CHAP. XI. Of the Polypus.
THOSE animals which we have described in the last chapter, are variously
denominated. They have been called the Star-fish, Sea-nettles, and Sea-polypi.
This last name has been peculiarly ascribed to them by the ancients, because of
the number of feelers or feet of which they are all possessed, and with which
they have a slow progressive motion; but the moderns have given the name of
Polypus, to a reptile that lives in fresh water, by no means so large or
observable. These are found at the bottom of wet ditches, or attached to the
under surface of the broad-leafed plants that grow and swim on the waters. The
same difference holds between these and the seawater polypus, as between all
the productions of the sea, and of the land and the ocean. The marine
vegetables and animals grow to a monstrous size. The eel, the pike, or the
bream of fresh-waters, is but small; but in the sea, they grow to an enormous
magnitude. The herbs of the field are at most but a few feet high; those of the
sea often shoot forth a stalk of a hundred. It is so between the polypi of both
elements. Those of the sea are found from two feet in length to three or four,
and Pliny has even described one, the arms of which were no less than thirty
feet long. Those in fresh waters, however, are comparatively minute; at their
utmost size, seldom above three parts of an inch long, and when gathered up
into their usual form, not above a third even of those dimensions.

It was upon these minute animals, that the power of dissection was first tried
in multiplying their numbers. They had been long considered as little worthy
the attention of observers, and were consigned to that neglect in which
thousands of minute species of insects remain to this very day. It is true,
indeed, that Reaumur observed, classed, and named them. By contemplating their
motions, he was enabled distinctly to pronounce on their being of the animal,
and not of the vegetable kingdom; and he called them Polypi, from their great
resemblance to those larger ones that were found in the ocean. Still, however,
their properties were neglected, and their history unknown.

Mr. Trembley was the person to whom we owe the first discovery of the amazing
properties and powers of this little vivacious creature: He divided this class
of animals into four different kinds; into those inclining to green, those of a
brownish cast, those of flesh-colors, those which he calls the polype de
panache. The differences of structure in these, as also of color, are
observable enough; but the manner of their subsisting, of seizing their prey,
and of their propagation, is pretty nearly the same in all.

Whoever has looked with care into the bottom of a wet ditch, when the water is
stagnant, and the sun has been powerful, may remember to have seen many little
transparent lumps of jelly, about the size of a pea, and flatted on one side;
such also as have examined the under side of the broad-leafed weeds that grow
on the surface of the water, must have observed them studded with a number of
these little jelly-like substances, which were probably then disregarded,
because their nature and history was unknown. These little substances however,
were no other than living polypi gathered up into a quiescent state and
seemingly inanimate, because either disturbed, or not excited by the calls of
appetite to action. When they are seen exerting themselves they put on a very
different appearance from that when at rest; to conceive a just idea of their
figure, we may suppose the finger of a glove cut off at the bottom; we may
suppose also several threads or horns planted round the edge like a fringe. The
hollow of this finger will give us an idea of the stomach of the animal, the
threads issuing forth from the edges may be considered as the arms or feelers,
with which it hunts for its prey. The animal, at its greatest extent, is seldom
seen above an inch and a half long, but it is much shorter when it is
contracted and at rest; it is furnished neither with muscles nor rings, and its
manner of lengthening or contracting itself, more resembles that of the snail,
than worms, or any other insect. The polypus contracts itself more or less, in
proportion as it is touched, or as the water is agitated in which they are
seen. Warmth animates them, and cold benumbs them; but it requires a degree of
cold approaching congelation before they are reduced to perfect inactivity;
those of an inch have generally their arms double, often thrice as long as
their bodies. The arms, where the animal is not disturbed, and the season not
unfavourable, are thrown about in various directions, in order to seize and
entangle its little prey; sometimes three or four of the arms are thus
employed, while the rest are contracted like the horns of a snail, within the
animal's body. It seems capable of giving what length it pleases to these arms;
it contracts and extends them at pleasure, and stretches them only in
proportion to the remoteness of the object it would seize.

These animals have a progressive motion, which is performed by that power they
have of lengthening and contracting themselves at pleasure; they go from one
part of the bottom to another; they mount along the margin of the water, and
climb up the side of aquatic plants. They often are seen to come to the surface
of the water, where they suspend themselves by their lower end. As they advance
but very slowly, they employ a great deal of time in every action, and bind
themselves very strongly to whatever body they chance to move upon as they
proceed; their adhesion is voluntary, and is probably performed in the manner
of a cupping glass applied to the body.

All animals of this kind have a remarkable attachment to turn toward the
light, and this naturally might induce an enquirer to look for their eyes; but
however carefully this search has been pursued, and however excellent the
microscope with which every part was examined yet nothing of the appearance of
this organ was found over the whole body; and it is most probable that, like
several other insects which hunt their prey by their feeling, these creatures
are unfurnished with advantages which would be totally useless for their
support.

In the center of the arms, as was said before, the mouth is placed, which the
animal can open and shut at pleasure, and this serves at once as a passage for
food, and an opening for it after digestion. The inward part of the animal's
body seems to be one great stomach, which is open at both ends; but the
purposes which the opening at the bottom serves are hitherto unknown, but
certainly not for excluding their excrements, for those are ejected at the
aperture by which they are taken in. If the surface of the body of this little
creature be examined with a microscope, it will be found studded with a number
of warts, as also the arms, especially when they are contracted; and these
tubercles, as we shall presently see, answer a very important purpose.

If we examine their way of living, we shall find these insects chiefly
subsisting upon others, much less than themselves, particularly a kind of
millepedes that live in the water, and a very small red worm, which they seize
with great avidity. In short, no insect whatsoever, less than themselves, seems
to come amiss to them; their arms, as was observed above, serve them as a net
would a fisherman, or perhaps more exactly speaking, as a lime-twig does a
fowler. Wherever their prey is perceived, which the animal effects by its
feeling, it is sufficient to touch the object it would seize upon and it is
fastened, without a power of escaping. The instant one of this insect's long
arms is laid upon a millepede, the little insect sticks without a possibility
of retreating. The greater the distance at which it is touched, the greater is
the ease with which the Polypus brings the prey to its mouth. If the little
object be near, though irretrievably caught, it is not without great difficulty
that it can be brought to the mouth and swallowed. When the Polypus is
unsupplied with prey, it testifies its hunger by opening its mouth; the
aperture, however, is so small that it cannot be easily perceived; but when,
with any of its long arms, it has seized upon its prey, it then opens the mouth
distinctly enough, and this opening is always in proportion to the size of the
animal which it would swallow; the lips dilate insensibly by small degrees, and
adjust themselves precisely to the figure of their prey. Mr. Trembley, who took
a pleasure in feeding this useless brood, found that they could devour aliments
of every kind, fish and flesh as well as insects; but he owns they did not
thrive so well upon beef and veal, as upon the little worms of their own
providing. When he gave one of these famished reptiles any substance which was
improper to serve for aliment, at first it seized the prey with avidity, but
after keeping it some time entangled near the mouth, it let drop again with
distinguishing nicety.

When several polypi happen to fall upon the same worm, they dispute their
common prey with each other. Two of them are often seen seizing the same worm
at different ends, and dragging it at opposie directions with great force. It
often happens that while one is swallowing its respective end, the other is
also employed in the same manner, and thus they continue swallowing each his
part, until their mouths meet together; they then rest, each for some time in
this situation, till the worm breaks between them, and each goes off with his
share; but it often happens, that a seemingly more dangerous combat ensues,
when the mouths of both are thus joined upon one common prey together: the
largest polypus then gapes and swallows his antagonist; but what is very
wonderful, the animal thus swallowed seems to be rather a gainer by the
misfortune. After it has lain in the conquerors body for about an hour, it
issues unhurt, and often in possession of the prey which had been the original
cause of contention; how happy would it be for men, if they had as little to
fear from each other!

These reptiles continue eating the whole year, except when the cold approaches
to congelation; and then, like most others of the insect tribe, they feel the
general torpor of nature, and all their faculties are for two or three months
suspended; but if they abstain at one time, they are equally voracious at
another, and like snakes, ants, and other animals that are torpid in winter,
the meal of one day sufficies them for several months together. In general,
however, they devour more largely in proportion to their size, and their growth
is quick exactly as they are fed; such as are best supplied, soonest acquire
their largest size, but they diminish also in their growth with the same
facility, if their food be taken away.

Such are the more obvious properties of these little animals, but the most
wonderful still remain behind: Their manner of propagation, or rather
multiplication, has for some years been the astonishment of all the learned of
Europe. They are produced in as great a variety of manners as every species of
vegetable. Some polypi are propagated from eggs, as plants are from their seed;
some are produced by buds issuing from their bodies, as plants are produced by
inoculation, while all may be multiplied by cuttings, and this to a degree of
minuteness that exceeds even philosophical perseverance.

With respect to such of this kind as are hatched from the egg little curious
can be added, as it is a method of propagation so common to all the tribes of
insect nature; but with regard to such as are produced like buds from their
parent stem, or like cuttings from an original root, their history requires a
more detailed explanation. If a polypus be carefully observed in summer, when
these animals are chiefly active, and more particularly prepared for
propagation, it will be found to burgeon forth from different parts of its body
several tubercles or little knobs, which grow larger and larger every day;
after two or three days inspection, what at first appeared but a small
excrescence takes the figure of a small animal, entirely resembling its parent,
furnished with feelers, a mouth, and all the apparatus for seizing and
digesting its prey. This little creature every day becomes larger, like the
parent, to which it continues attached; it spreads its arms to seize upon
whatever insect is proper for aliment, and devours it for its own particular
benefit; thus it is possessed of two sources of nourishment, that which it
receives from the parent by the tail, and that which it receives from its own
industry by the mouth. The food which these animals receive often tinctures the
whole body, and upon this occasion the parent is often seen communicating a
part of its own fluids to that of its progeny that grows upon it; while, on the
contrary, it never receives any tincture, from any substance that is caught and
swallowed by its young. If the parent swallows a red worm, which gives a
tincture to all its fluids, the young one partakes of the parental color; but
if the latter should seize upon the same prey, the parent polypus is no way
benefited by the capture, but all the advantage remains with the young one.

But we are not to suppose that the parent is capable of producing only one at
a time, several young ones are thus seen at once, of different sizes, growing
from its body, some just budding forth, others acquiring their perfect form,
and others come to sufficient maturity, and just ready to drop from the
original stem to which they had been attached for several days. But what is
more extraordinary still, those young ones themselves that continue attached to
their parent, are seen to burgeon, and propagate their own young ones also,
each holding the same dependence upon its respective parent, and possessed of
the same advantages that have been already described in the first connection.
Thus we see a surprising chain of existence continued, and numbers of animals
naturally produced without any union of the sexes, or other previous
disposition of nature.

This seems to be the most natural way by which these insects are multiplied;
their production from the egg being not so common; and though some of this kind
are found with a little bladder attached to their bodies, which is supposed to
be filled with eggs, which afterward come to maturity, yet the artificial
method of propagating these animals, is much more expeditious and equally
certain: It is indifferent whether one of them be cut into ten, or ten hundred
parts, each becomes as perfect an animal as that which was originally divided,
but it must be observed, that the smaller the part which is thus separated from
the rest, the longer it will be in coming to maturity, or in assuming its
perfect form. It would be endless to recount the many experiments that have
been tried upon this philosophical prodigy; the animal has been twisted, and
turned into all manner of shapes; it has been turned inside out, it has been
cut in every division, yet still it continued to move; its parts adapted
themselves again to each other, and in a short time it became as voracious and
industrious as before.

Besides these kinds mentioned by Mr.Trembley, there are various others which
have been lately discovered by the vigilance of succeeding observers, and some
of these so strongly resemble a flowering vegetable in their forms, that they
have been mistaken by many naturalists for such. Mr. Hughes, the author of the
Natural History of Barbados, has described a species of this animal, but has
mistaken its nature, and called it a sensitive flowering plant; he observed it
to take refuge in the holes of rocks, and when undisturbed, to spread forth a
number of ramifications, each terminated by a flowery petal which shrunk at the
approach of the hand, and withdrew into the hole from whence before it had been
seen to issue. This plant however was no other than an animal of the polypus
kind, which is not only to be found in Barbados, but also on many parts of the
coast of Cornwall, and along the shores of the Continent.

CHAP. XII. Of Lithophytes and Sponges.
IT is very probable that the animals we see, and are acquainted with, bear no
manner of proportion to those that are concealed from us. Although every leaf
and vegetable swarms with animals upon land, yet at sea, they are still more
abundant; for the greatest part of what would seem vegetables growing there are
in fact nothing but the artificial formation of insects, palaces which they
have built for their own habitation.

If we examine the bottom of the sea along some shores, and particularly at the
mouths of several rivers, we shall find it has the appearance of a forest of
trees under water, millions of plants growing in various directions, with their
branches entangled in each other, and sometime standing so thick as to obstruct
navigation. The shores of the Persian gulf, the whole extent of the Red Sea,
and the western coasts of America, are so choked up in many places with these
Coraline substances, that though depiction of some types of coral The
Coral-plants.
E. Martin sculp.
ships force a passage through them, boats and swimmers find it impossible to
make their way. These aquatic groves are formed of different substances, and
assume various appearances. The coral-plants, as they are called, sometimes
shoot out like trees without leaves in winter; they often spread out a broad
surface like a fan, and not uncommonly a large bundling head, like a faggot;
sometimes they are found to resemble a plant with leaves and flowers; and often
the antlers of a stag, with great exactness and regularity. In other parts of
the sea are seen sponges of various magnitude, and extraordinary appearances,
assuming a variety of phantastic forms like large mushrooms, mitres, fonts and
flower-pots. To an attentive spectator these various productions seem entirely
of the vegetable kind; they seem to have their leaves and their flowers, and
have been experimentally known to shoot out branches in the compass of a year.
Philosophers, therefore, till of late, thought themselves pretty secure in
ascribing these productions to the vegetable kingdom; and Count Marsigli, who
has written very laboriously and learnedly upon the subject of corals and
sponges, has not hesitated to declare his opinion, that they were plants of the
aquatic kind, furnished with flowers and seed, and endued with a vegetation
entirely resembling that which is found upon land. This opinion, however, some
time after, began to be shaken by Rumphius and Jussieu, and at last by the
ingenious Mr. Ellis who by a more sagacious and diligent enquiry into nature,
put it past doubt, that corals and sponges were entirely the work of animals
and that like the honeycomb, which was formed by the be, the coral was the
work of an infinite number of reptiles of the polypus kind, whose united
labors were thus capable of filling whole tracts of the ocean with those
embarrassing tokens of their industry.

If in our researches after the nature of these plants, we should be induced to
break off a branch of the coraline substance, and observe it carefully, we
shall perceive its whole surface, which is very rugged and irregular, covered
with a mucous fluid, and almost in every part studded with little jelly-like
drops, which when closely examined, will be found to be no other than reptiles
of the polypus kind. These have their motions, their arms, their appetites,
exactly resembling those described in the last chapter, but they soon expire
when taken out of the sea, and our curiosity is at once stopped in its career,
by the animals ceasing to give any marks of their industry; recourse therefore
has been had to other expedients, in order to determine the nature of the
inhabitant, as well as the habitation.

If a coraline plant be strictly observed, while still growing in the sea, and
the animals upon its surface be not disturbed, either by the agitation of the
waters, or the touch of the observer, the little polypi will then be seen in
infinite numbers, each issuing from its cell, and in some kinds, the head
covered with a little shell, resembling an umbrella, the arms spread abroad, in
order to seize its prey, while the hinder part still remains attached to its
habitation, from whence it never wholly removes. By this time it is perceived
that the number of inhabitants is infinitely greater than was at first
suspected; that they are all assiduously employed in the same pursuits, and
that they issue from their respective cells, and retire into them at pleasure.
Still, however, there are no proofs that those large branches which they
inhabit are entirely the construction of such feeble and minute animals. But
chemistry will be found to lend a clue to extricate us from our doubts in this
particular. Like the shells which are formed by snails, muscles and oysters,
these coraline substances effervesce with acids, and may therefore well be
supposed to partake of the same animal nature. But Mr. Ellis went still
farther, and examined their operations, just as they were beginning. Observing
an oyster-bed which had been for some time neglected, he there perceived the
first rudiments of a coraline plantation, and tufts of various kinds shooting
from different parts of this favorable soil. It was upon these he tried his
principal experiment. He took out the oysters which were thus furnished with
coralines, and placed them in a large wooden vessel, covering them with
seawater. In about an hour, he perceived the animals, which before had been
contracted by handling, and had shown no signs of life, expanding themselves in
every direction, and appearing employed in their own natural manner. Perceiving
them therefore in this state, his next aim was to preserve them thus expanded,
so as to be permanent objects of curiosity. For this purpose he poured, by slow
degrees, an equal quantity of boiling-water into the vessel of sea water in
which they were immersed. He then separated each polypus with pincers from its
shell, and plunged each separately into small crystal vases, filled with
spirit of wine mixed with water. By this means, the animal was preserved
entire, without having time to contract itself, and he thus perceived a variety
of kinds, almost equal to that variety of productions which these little
animals are seen to form. He has been thus able to perceive and describe fifty
different kinds, each of which is seen to possess its own peculiar mode of
construction, and to form a coraline that none of the rest can imitate. It is
true indeed, than on every coraline substance there are a number of polypi
found, no way resembling those which are the erectors of the building; these
may be called a vagabond race of reptiles, that are only intruders upon the
labors of others, and that take possession of habitations, which they have
neither art nor power to build for themselves. But in general, the same
difference that subsists between the honeycomb of the be, and the paper-like
cells of the wasp, subsists between the different habitations of the
coral-making polypi.

With regard to the various forms of these substances, they have obtained
different names from the nature of the animal that produced them, or the
likeness they bear to some wellknown object, such as coralines
fungimadre-pores, sponges, astroites, and keratophytes. Though these differ
extremely in their outward appearances, yet they all are formed in the same
manner by reptiles of various kinds and nature. When examined chemically, they
all discover the marks of animal formation; the corals, as was said, dissolve
in acids, the sponges burn with an odor strongly resembling that of burnt
horn. We are left somewhat at a loss with regard to the precise manner in which
this multitude of cells which at last assume the appearance of a plant or
flower, are formed. If we may be led in this subject by analogy, it is most
probable, that the substance of coral is produced in the same manner that the
shell of the snail grows round it; these little reptiles are each possessed of
a slimy matter, which covers its body, and this hardening, as in the snail,
becomes an habitation exactly fitted to the body of the animal that is to
reside in it; several of these habitations being joined together, form at
length a considerable mass, and as most animals are productive, in proportion
to their minuteness, so these multiplying in a surprising degree at length form
those extensive forests that cover the bottom of the deep.

Thus all nature seems replete with life; almost every plant on land has its
surface covered with millions of these minute creatures, of whose existence we
are certain, but of whose uses we are entirely ignorant; while numbers of what
seem plants at sea are not only the receptacles of insects, but also entirely
of insect formation. This might have led some late philosophers into an
opinion, that all nature was animated, that every, even the most inert mass of
matter, was endued with life and sensation, but wanted organs to make those
sensations perceptible to the observer: Those opinions, taken up at random, are
difficultly maintained, and as difficultly refuted; like combatants that meet
in the dark, each party may deal a thousand blows without ever reaching the
adversary. Those perhaps are wiser who view nature as she offers; who without
searching too deeply into the recesses in which she ultimately hides, are
contented to take her as she presents herself, and storing their minds with
effects, rather than with causes, instead of the embarrasment of systems, about
which few agree, are contented with the history of appearances, concerning
which, all mankind have but one opinion.

FINIS.
INDEX. OF THE Various Matter contained in this Work.
The Roman character denotes the volume, the Arabic number the page.

A.
ABDOMINAL Fish, has the ventral nearer the tail than the pectoral fins, vi.
304 Abstemious life, its great benefit, ii. 200 Abstinence, religiously
observed long after the Reformation -- queen Elizabeth's injunctions upon this
head -- a heavenly institution, from its benefit to individuals and advantage
to society, ii. 131 -- remarkable instance of it in the sloth, iv. 347
Acanthopterigii, a name of the prickly-finned fish, vi. 303 Achilles, a Roman
tribune, called the second of that name; and why, ii. 117 Acorn, its shell
filled by an immovable animal, viii. 162 -- a shellfish, vii. 64 Adriatic, its
empire claimed by the republic of Venice, i. 232 Aelian, his account of the
dreadful cavern, called the Gulf of Pluto, i. 61 -- has seen an elephant write
Latin characters on a board, his keeper showing him the figure of each letter,
iv. 261 Aetna, volcano in Sicily -- remarkable eruption in 1537, i. 89 --
account of it -- the burning seen at Malta, i. 90 -- the quantity of matter
discharged, supposed to exceed twenty times the original bulk of the mountain,
i. 102 -- walls built of materials thrown up by it, i. 103 Aeolipila, an
instrument to produce artificial wind -- its description, and the manner of
generating violent blasts, i. 337 Africa, its sandy storms, i. 363 -- destroy
villages and armies, i. 366 -- several animals with four stomachs in Europe,
have but two in Africa, ii. 317 -- the zebra a native of Africa, ii. 390 -- has
the largest and smallest of the cow kind, iii. 14 -- the ferret originally from
Africa, iv. 22 -- its animals very fierce, and its savages most brutal -- they
suppose monkies obstinately dumb to avoid labor, iv. 231 -- the elephant a
native of Africa -- the savage inhabitants attempt not to subdue this creature,
and wish only to escape its fury; thus it retains liberty in Africa -- the
natives are greatly degenerated, iv. 267 Age, the mountains of Scotland, Wales,
Auvergne, and Switzerland, furnish more instances of old age, than the plains
of Holland, Flanders, Germany, or Poland, ii. 202 -- the age of trees known by
the number of their circles, vi. 176 -- two methods for determining the age of
fishes, vi. 176 -- the undoubted great age of some fishes, vi. 177 Agouti, an
animal found in great abundance in South America, and by some called the rabbit
of that continent; it resembles the rabbit, yet is different from ours, and
peculiar to the new world, -- its description, iv. 49 -- its ordinary food --
it has the hair and voraciousness of a hog -- eats greedily and hides the
remainder -- burrows in hollow trees -- its manner of feeding, and walking --
sight and hearing -- its flesh, how dressed, iv. 50 -- how hunted and forced
out of its hole -- it turns in its own defense upon the hunters -- its bite,
and cry -- how tamed, iv. 51 -- bears two young at each litter; breeds at least
twice a year; carries its young about like a cat; and lodges them in a tree,
where they soon become able to provide for themselves, iv. 52 Agricola, has
seen hats made of mole skins, most beautiful, iv. 98 Agriculture, the number of
hands employed in the manufacture of silk, turned to agriculture, would
increase the quantity of corn to more than an equivalent for the diminution of
national wealth in purchasing wrought silk from other countries, vi. 284 Ai, a
name of the sloth -- its description, iv. 344 Aicurous, a great parrot -- its
sagacity and docility, v. 277 Aigues-mortes, town in France, a port in the time
of St. Louis; now removed more than four miles from the sea, i. 277 Air, the
only active agent in earthquakes, i. 105 -- Amonton's calculation of a moderate
degree of heat sufficient to give the air amazing powers of expansion, i. 106
-- too fine for our sight, is very obvious to our touch -- its elasticity -- a
cubic foot of air weighs more than an ounce, i. 299 -- four thousand pound
weight of air carried at one time more than at another, and why; i. 303 -- the
air contained in a nut-shell, may be dilated into unknown dimensions -- the air
contained in a house, may be compressed into a cavity equal to the eye of a
needle -- the increasing elasticity of compressed air augmented by heat, would
when expanded be sufficient for the explosion of a world, i. 304 -- one of the
most compounded bodies in nature, i. 311 -- scarce any substance resisting its
corroding qualities, i. 312 -- factitious air produced in great quantities from
vegetable, animal, or mineral substances -- proves a greater enemy to animals
than a vacuum -- a bird enclosed in artificial air, from raisins, died in a
quarter of a minute -- a frog included in artificial air -- a snail put into
the receiver, with air of paste, died in four minutes, i. 318 and 319 -- to be
wholesome, should not be of one kind, but a compound of several substances, i.
320 -- how air contributes to the support of our lives -- a dispute upon it, i.
331, 332 -- gives life and body to flame, i. 333 -- kindles fire into flame,
moderates the rays of light, and dissipates their violence, -- conveyance of
sound -- all the pleasure received from conversation, or from music, depends
entirely upon the air -- odours are diffused by the air, i. 334 -- a hand upon
the mouth of a vessel from which the air has been exhausted, is violently
sucked inwards, and why, i. 300 and 301 -- the mouth of such vessel inverted
being immersed, the water will rise into the empty space, and fill the glass,
i. 301 -- the manner in which this is done -- water never ascends higher than
thirty-two feet -- our ordinary load of air amounts nearly to forty thousand
pounds, i. 302 -- vegetables, or the bodies of animals left to putrefy, produce
air in a very copious manner, i. 337 -- it finds admission into wine or other
fermented liquors, and most easily into spirits of wine -- mountains, minerals,
vegetables, animals, and fires, contribute to increase a current of air, i. 338
-- a tide of air produced by the sun and moon, i. 354 -- a current of air,
driven through a contracted space, grows more violent and irresistible, i. 355
-- the air at Cusco is so dry and so cold that flesh dries there like wood,
without corrupting, ii. 274 Air-pump, the experiment of a carp placed under it,
vi. 169 -- fish can live but a few minutes without air; nothing more difficult
to be accounted for, than the manner in which they obtain this necessary
supply, vi. 170 Air-bladder, in fishes, described, vi. 171 Albatross, a bird of
the gull kind -- its description by Edwards -- is an inhabitant of the tropical
climates, and other regions, as far as the streights of Magellan in the South
Seas -- is the most fierce and formidable of the aquatic tribe; it chiefly
pursues the flying-fish, forced from the sea by the dolphins, vi. 61 --
Wicquefort's account of this bird, vi. 62 -- it seems to have a peculiar
affection for the penguin, and a pleasure in its society, vi. 63 -- its nest,
vi. 64 Albouras,, a famous volcano near mount Taurus, i. 98 Alder, hares will
not feed on the bark of it, iv. 7 Algazel, the seventh variety of gazelles with
Mr. Buffon, iii. 74 Aldrovandus, places the bats among birds, iv. 134 -- he
having spent a fortune, to enlighten mankind, and collected more truth and
falsehood than any man, was reduced to want, to suffer ingratitude, and to die
in a hospital, vi. 117 Alexander's soldiers agitated by curiosity and
apprehension at the tides in the river Indus, i. 258 Alligator, or the Cayman,
a kind of crocodile, vii. 119 Alps, dreadful chasms found in them, i. 59 --
Pope's description of a traveller straining up the Alps, i. 143 -- the highest
point of them not above sixteen hundred toises above the surface of the sea, i.
153 Amazons, the greatest river in the world, has its source among the Andes,
i. 142 -- its course from its origin in the lake of Lauricocha, to its
discharge into the Western Ocean, is more than twelve hundred leagues, i. 215
-- its discharge is through a channel of an hundred and fifty miles broad,
after receiving above sixty considerable rivers, i. 216, 217 -- la Condamine
asserts it would take a volume to describe the various monkies found along that
river, iv. 216 -- Ambergrise, long considered as a substance found floating on
the sea, but since discovered to belong to the cachalot -- the balls of
ambergrise found in all fishes of this kind, but chiefly in the oldest and and
strongest, vi^ 220, 21 Ambrose, (St.) his credulity concerning the halcyon, vi.
144 America exceeds in the size of its reptiles, but is inferior in its
quadrupeds, ii. 332 -- the black rats, originally from Europe, have propagated
greatly in America, and are now the most noxious animals there, iv. 17 -- the
American mock-bird, assumes the tone of every animal in the wood, from the wolf
to the raven, v. 325 -- its description and habits, v. 324, 325 -- Catesby
asserts the wolf was the only dog used by the Americans, before they had the
Europeans among them -- the tapir is the largest animal of America -- opinion
that all quadrupeds in South America are of a different species from those
resembling them in the Old World -- and such as peculiarly belong to that New
Continent, are without the marks of the quadrupede perfection, ii. 332, 333 --
description of the natives of that country, ii. 229 -- the savages there
suppose monkies to be men, but obstinately dumb, to avoid being compelled to
labor, iv. 231 -- the vampyre, considered as a great pest of South America --
and an obstruction to the peopling of many parts of that continent, iv. 146 --
the manufacture of stuffs, of the wool of the pacos, a very considerable branch
of commerce in South America, iv. 317 -- no rabbits naturally in America -- but
there are animals, in some measure, resembling the rabbits of Europe, iv. 24 --
that part of the American continent which lies under the line, is cool and
pleasant, ii. 233 -- cause of the tawny color of the North American Indians --
they paint their skins with red oker, and anoint them with the fat of bears,
ii. 236 -- the original cause of their flat heads, ii. 239 -- American
wood-duck described, vi. 130 Amia, or Bonito, description of this fish, vi. 314
Ammodytes, or the Lance, a fish -- its description, vi. 311 Ammodytes, a kind
of viper -- it darts with amazing swiftness, vii. 180 Amonton's calculation
proves a moderate degree of heat may give the air amazing powers of expansion,
i. 106 Amor, a river of Eastern Tartary, i. 210 -- it receives about forty
lesser rivers, i. 217 Amphibious quadrupeds have motion in the lower eyelid
alone, ii. 85 -- general description of that class, iv. 148 Amphisboena, or the
double-headed serpent, vii. 222 Amsterdam, the perfume of the civet sold there
is the purest of any, iii. 392 Anarchicas, the wolf-fish, its description, vi.
311 Anatomists puzzled to find parts of the human body superior to those of
some apes, ii. 311 -- none known that have described the lungs of the lamprey,
vi. 271 Anchovy has no bladder, vi. 174 Andalusia, gennets of that province the
best, ii. 357 Andes, amazing chasms or fissures in them -- some of these are a
mile wide, and others, running underground, resemble a province, i. 60 -- the
highest mountains of the world, i. 99 -- excellent description of them by
Ulloa, i. 147 -- the Andes are by measure three thousand one hundred and
thirty-six toises, or fathoms, above the surface of the sea, i. 151, 153 -- at
the top no difficulty of breathing perceived, i. 154 -- manner of mules going
down the precipices, ii. 387 Anemometer, an instrument to measure the velocity
of the wind -- gives no certain information of the force of a storm, i. 356
Angora. The cat of Angora, iii. 212 -- the goat of Angora, iii. 57 -- a number
of animals about Angora, affording hair for trade -- the camlet made of such
hair, iii. 58 Anhima, a bird of the crane kind, of Brasil, v. 389 -- described
-- the cock and the hen prowl together -- when one dies, the other stays by it,
and dies also, v. 390 Animals hold the first rank amidst the infinitely
different productions the earth offers, ii. 1 -- are endowed with powers of
motion and defense, even those fixed to one spot -- organized beings provided
with some defense for their own security, ii. 2 -- endued with life and vigor
-- some, by nature, violent -- have their enmities and affections, ii. 4 --
ultimately supported upon vegetables -- those in a dry sunny climate strong and
vigorous -- different vegetables appropriated to the different appetites, and
why, ii. 5 -- of domestic kinds, carried from milder countries into northern
climates, quickly degenerate and grow less, ii. 6 -- in the internal parts of
South America and Africa grow to a prodigious size, and why -- not so in the
cold frozen regions of the North, ii. 6 -- the most perfect races have the
least similitude to the vegetable productions on which they are ultimately fed
-- the meaner the animal, the more local, ii. 7 -- assume different habits as
well as appearances, and why, ii. 9 -- some peculiar to every part of the
vegetable system -- there are that live upon other animals -- this wisely so
constituted, ii. 11 -- to diminish the number of animals, and increase that of
vegetables, the general scope of human industry -- of the vast variety, very
few serviceable to man, ii. 12 -- in a catalogue of more than twenty thousand
land animals, scarcely an hundred are any way useful to man, ii. 13 --
expediency of man's living upon animals as well as vegetables, ii. 14 -- little
more known than that the greatest number require the concurrence of a male and
female to reproduce their kind -- and these, distinctly and invariably, found
to beget creatures of their own species, ii. 16 -- usual distinction, with
respect to their manner of generation, into oviparous and viviparous kinds, ii.
22 -- the warmth of the sun, or of a stove, efficacious in bringing the animal
in the egg to perfection, ii. 27 -- such parts as the animal has double, or
without which it can live, are the latest in production, ii. 35 -- De Graaf has
attended the progress and increase of various animals in the womb, and minutely
marked the changes they undergo, ii. 36 -- that which, in proportion to its
bulk, takes the longest time for production, the most complete when finished --
of all others, man the slowest in coming into life, ii. 48 -- the most
formidable are the least fruitful, ii. 49 -- and why -- those which bring forth
many engender before they have arrived at half their natural size -- approach
more to perfection, whose generation nearly resembles that of man, ii. 50 --
Men and apes the only that have eyelashes upon the upper and lower lids -- all
others want them on the lower lid, ii. 85 -- that which has most desires
appears capable of the greatest variety of happiness, ii. 123 -- those of the
forest remain without food several weeks -- all endure the wants of sleep and
hunger with less injury to health than man -- nature contracts the stomachs of
carnivorous animals of the forest to suit them to their precarious way of
living, ii. 124 -- but the meaner tribes are still most capable of sustaining
life without food, ii. 124, 125 -- some lower animals seem to spend the
greatest part of their lives in sleep, ii. 134 -- some affected by music --
instances of it, ii. 168 -- those furnished with hands have more understanding
than others, ii. 185 -- in general, the large animals live longer than the
little, ii. 200 -- difference between animals in a state of nature and domestic
tameness, so considerable that M. Buffon makes it a principal distinction of
classes, ii. 310 -- their teeth fitted to the nature of their food, ii. 315 --
and their legs as well fitted to their respective wants or enjoyments, ii. 316
-- those who chew the cud have four stomachs -- several that with us have four
stomachs, have but two in Africa, ii. 317 -- no carnivorous animal, except the
dog, makes a voluntary attack but with superiority, ii. 319 -- the stomach
generally proportioned to the nature of the food, or the ease with which it is
obtained, ii. 317 -- the size of the intestines proportioned to the nature of
the food, ii. 318 -- few of the wild sort seek their prey in the daytime -- in
proportion as each carnivorous animal wants strength, it uses all the
assistance of patience, assiduity, and cunning, ii. 320 -- some animals
carefully avoid their enemies by placing sentinels to warn of the approach of
danger, and know how to punish such as have neglected their post, or been
unmindful of the common safety, ii. 324 -- the wild sort subject to few
alterations, and in the savage state continue for ages the same, in size,
shape, and color, ii. 325 -- is otherwise when subdued and taken under the
protection of man, ii. 325, 327 -- the tame kind bears no resemblance to its
ancestors in the woods, ii. 326 -- animals feeding only upon grass, rendered
carnivorous -- two instances, ii. 327 -- Africa ever remarkable for the
fierceness of its animals, ii. 331 -- the smallest multiply the fastest, ii.
333 -- the larger sort bring few at a time -- seldom generate till they be near
their full growth -- those which bring many reproduce before they arrive at
half their natural size, ii. 335 -- with all animals, the time of their
pregnancy is proportioned to their size -- in all kinds, the intermediate
litters the most fruitful -- the first and last generally produce the fewest in
number and worst of kind, ii. 336 -- natural instinct to choose the proper
times of copulation, ii. 337 -- whatever the natural disposition of animals,
they all have courage to defend their young -- instances of it, ii. 336 -- Milk
in the carnivorous animals more sparing than in others, ii. 337 -- choice of
situation in bringing forth, remarkable in animals, ii. 338 -- the ass, in a
state of tameness, the most gentle and quiet of all animals, ii. 381 -- of all
animals covered with hair, the ass the least subject to vermin, ii. 386 -- the
zebra the most beautiful, but the wildest animal in nature, ii. 390 --
perfectly know their enemies, and how to avoid them -- instances of it, ii. 395
-- best method of classing animals adopted by Ray, Klein, and Linnaeus, ii.
294, to 299 -- the author's method of classing them, 301, to 308 -- the
carnivorous seek their food in gloomy solitude, -- they are sharper than the
ruminating kind, and why -- ruminating animals most harmless, and most easily
tamed -- generally go in herds, for their mutual security -- live entirely upon
vegetables, iii. 1 -- the meanest of them unite in each other's defense --
carnivorous animals have small stomachs and short intestines -- ruminating
animals naturally more indolent and less artful than the carnivorous kinds, and
why, iii. 2. -- their bowels considered as an elaboratory, with proper vessels
in it -- nature enlarges the capacity of their intestines to take in a greater
supply, iii. 3 -- and furnishes them with four stomachs -- the names of these
four stomachs iii. 3, 4. -- the intestines of carnivorous animals are thin and
lean; but those of the ruminating sort strong, fleshy, and well covered with
fat, iii. 4. -- of all others, man spends the least time in eating, iii. 7 --
of all ruminant, the cow kind deserve the first rank, iii. 8 -- naturalists
give various names to the same, only differing in accidental circumstances --
of all, except man, the cow most extensively propagated, iii. 24 -- greatest
variety among cows, none more humble and pliant of disposition, iii. 25 -- the
large kind of the torrid zone very fond of the water, iii. 29 -- some void
their dung, when pursued; this arises rather from fear, than a desire of
defense, iii. 32 -- the number of the cow kind, by naturalists extended to
eight or ten sorts, reduced to two; one animal of the cow kind, no naturalist
has hitherto described, it may be added as a third species -- description of
it, iii. 33, 34 -- all the ruminant internally much alike, iii. 36 -- those
that take refuge under the protection of man, in a few generations become
indolent and helpless -- the sheep, in a domestic state, the most defenseless
and inoffensive, iii. 38 -- also the most stupid, iii. 40 -- a great number and
variety about Angora; the inhabitants drive trade with their hair, iii. 58 --
the kinds actually not distinguished by the horns, color, position of the
ears, or fineness of the hair, iii. 60 -- the fat, urine, beak, and even dung
of various animals efficacious in some disorders, iii. 69 -- of all in the
world, the gazelle has the most beautiful eye, iii. 72 -- scarce one animal,
except the carnivorous, that does not produce concretions in the stomach,
intestines, kidneys, bladder, or in the heart, iii. 76 -- no naturalist informs
us whether that which bears the musk, be a ruminant, or of the hog kind, iii.
91 -- by a general rule, every animal lives about seven or eight times the
number of years it continues to grow, iii. 103 -- of all natives of this
climate, none have such a beautiful eye as the stag, iii. 105 -- no two more
nearly allied than the stag and the fallow deer; yet form distinct families,
and never engender together, iii. 125 -- many that once flourished in the
world, may now be extinct, iii. 136 -- of all the deer kind, the rein deer the
most extraordinary, and most useful, iii. 149 -- of all, when young, none more
prettily playful than the kitten, iii. 202 -- many in Syria and Persia
remarkable for long soft hair, iii. 212 -- most terrestrial are larger,
fiercer, and stronger, in warm than in cold or temperate climates, iii. 213 --
the only not afraid singly to make opposition to the lion, the elephant, the
rhinoceros, the tiger, and the hippopotamos, iii. 225 -- of all American, the
tiger the most formidable and mischievous, iii. 245 -- the generality have
greater agility, greater swiftness, and more formidable arms, from nature, than
man; and their senses, particularly that of smelling, are far more perfect,
iii. 275 -- those living upon flesh hunt by nature, iii. 276 -- all under the
influence of man, are subject to great variations, iii. 279 -- many in this
country breed between a dog and a fox, iii. 298 -- all savage, that have once
tasted human flesh, never refrain from pursuing mankind, iii. 336 -- those of
the north, in winter, are more hairy, than those of the milder climates, iii.
356 -- and what the cause, iii. 355, 356 -- of the arctic climates, have their
winter and summer garments, except as far north as Greenland, iii. 356 -- of
the weasel kind, the martin the most pleasing, iii. 368 -- feeding entirely
upon vegetables, are inoffensive and timorous, iv. 3 -- remarkable for speed,
except the horse, have the hind feet longer than the fore, iv. 4 -- none
receives the male when pregnant, except the hare, iv. 6 -- hares the only that
have hair on the inside of their mouths, iv. 8 -- few of the wild kind have so
many varieties as the squirrel, iv. 25 -- all are tamed more difficultly in
proportion to their cowardice, iv. 72 -- in all countries, civilized and
improved, the lower ranks of animals repressed and degraded, iv. 157 -- the
beaver the only that in its fore parts resembles a quadruped, and in its hinder
parts approaches the nature of fishes, iv. 159 -- a true judgment of their
disposition by their looks, and a just conjecture of their internal habits from
their external form, iv. 208 -- the lori, of all other the longest, in
proportion to size, iv. 241 -- the camel the most temperate of all, iv. 303 --
the ostrich the most voracious, v. 54 -- of all that use their wings and legs
in running, the ostrich is the swiftest, v. 60 -- none has greater courage than
the cock, opposed to one of his own species, v. 163 -- the presence of man
destroys the society of meaner animals, and their instincts also, vi. 64 --
those longest in the womb, are the longest lived, according to Pliny, vi. 119
-- none harder to be killed than the shark, vi. 244 -- the snail kind are
hermaphrodites, vii. 30 -- of all four-footed, the frog the best swimmer, vii.
75 -- the catterpillar has the greatest number of enemies, viii. 43 -- whatever
kind, long under the protection of man, lose part of their natural sagacity, in
providing for themselves, viii. 83 -- that which fills the acorn-shell is
immovable, viii. 162 -- a most numerous tribe lately discovered, propagated by
cuttings -- many entirely without motion. -- all seem possessed of one power,
of which vegetables are totally deficient, viii. 162 -- certain races of
animals fall beneath vegetables, by their more imperfect propagation, viii. 163
-- Some live without limbs, and often reproduce them; some live without brain
for many weeks together; some increase and grow large, though all their nobler
organs are entirely destroyed; some continue to exist, though cut in two, their
nobler parts preserving life, while the others perish that were cut away; the
zoophyte tribe, continues to live in separate parts, and one animal, by the
means of cutting, is divided into two distinct existences, sometimes into a
thousand, viii. 170, 171 -- the first discovery of the power of reproduction in
animals owing to Mr. Tremblay, viii. 172 Antelope, tenth variety of gazelles by
Mr. Buffon -- its description, iii. 78 -- the Indian antelope, iii. 79
Antilles, the negroes of these islands, by smell alone, distinguish between the
footsteps of a Frenchman and a negroe. Antlers, their distinct names, iii. 114
Antiparos, its grotto most remarkable, i. 67 Antipathy of the marmout to the
dog, iv. 45 -- quadrupeds which have natural antipathy against the Norway rat,
iv. 69, 70 -- many have it to some animals, whose presence they instantly
perceive by the smell, ii. 182 -- dogs and wolves so different in their
dispositions, that no animals can have a more perfect antipathy, iii. 309 --
between the porcupine and serpent so irreconcilable as never to meet without a
mortal engagement, iv. 111 -- the same subsists between the jackall and the
dog, iii. 338 -- no animals more alike than the cow and the buffalo, yet, none
have stronger dislikes to each other, iii. 26 Antiquity, most naturally looked
up to with reverential wonder, ii. 263 St. Anthony, lived an hundred and five
years, ii. 132 Ants, their food and excursions, viii. 120 -- their eggs so very
small, that upon a black ground, they can scarcely be discerned, viii. 121 --
fond attachment of the working ants to their progeny, viii. 122 -- the aurelia
state, and efforts to get rid of their skins -- experiment of Mr. de Geer to
this purpose, viii. 123 -- state of the female, after she has done laying, not
known; the males then fly away and are heard of no more, viii. 124 -- ants of
the tropical climates build a hill with great contrivance and regularity, lay
up provisions; and, living the whole year, submit to regulations entirely
different from the ants of Europe -- three kinds of African ants -- their hills
from six to twelve feet high, viii. 125 -- amazing number and regularity of
their cells -- depredations and adventures -- they live under strict
regulations -- order in which they sally forth -- often quit their dwelling in
a body, and go in quest of adventures, viii. 126 -- an instance of it given by
Smith, viii. 127 -- their sting produces extreme pain, viii. 125 -- every
writer of antiquity describes this insect, as laboring in the summer, and
feasting upon the produce during the winter; in some of the warmer climates
this may be so; but in France and England they are in a state of torpidity
during winter, viii. 115, 116, 124, 125 -- common ants of Europe -- their
description, viii. 116 -- fears not to attack a creature ten times its own
magnitude, viii. 117 -- are divided into males, females, and neutral or working
tribe -- in what manner distinguished from each other -- males and females seem
no way to partake in the common drudgeries of the state; males pursue the
females with great assiduity, and force them to compliance -- remain coupled
for some time, viii. 118 -- description of the ant-hills in southern parts of
Europe constructed with wonderful contrivance, viii. 119 -- drive the hare from
its form, iv. 12 -- many animals live upon ants in Africa and America, iv. 338
Ants, the ant-lion, vii. 323 Ant-eater, or Ant-bear, description and habits,
iv. 339, 340 -- their art to catch the ants -- manner of defense against its
enemies, iv. 342 -- kills the invader, and remains fastened upon him with
vindictive desperation, iv. 345 Antioch, buried by an earthquake, i. 110 Aorta,
the great artery, ii. 41 Aperea, by some the Brasilian rabbit, iv. 54 -- Its
description, iv. 55 Apes, the foremost of the kind is the ouran-outang, or wild
man of the woods, iv. 189 -- description of this animal by Dr. Tyson, iv. 191,
193, 195 -- comparative view of this creature with man, iv. 191 to 94 --
another descripton of it by Mr. Buffon, iv. 195, 196 -- two young ones, but a
year old, discovered an astonishing power of imitation, iv. 197 -- a kind
called baris, properly instructed when young, serve as useful domestics, iv.
198 -- Le Comte's account of an ape in the streights of Molucca, iv. 198 -- the
long armed ape an extraordinary and remarkable creature, iv. 206 -- its
description -- a native of the East Indies, and found along the coasts of
Coromandel, iv. 207 -- fling themselves from one rope to another, at thirty,
forty, and fifty feet distance, iv. 199 -- instances of amazing nimbleness --
in a state of nature they run upon all fours -- certain proofs of it, iv. 205
-- in some of the kind the resemblance to man so striking, that anatomists are
puzzled to find in what part of the human body man's superiority consists, ii.
311 -- enjoy many advantages in common with men, above the lower tribes of
nature, ii. 311 -- in the navies of Solomon, among the articles imported from
the East, are apes and peacocks, v. 171 -- apes have eye-lashes upon the upper
and lower lids, ii. 85 -- slight survey of the ape kind, iv. 188 -- the only
animal possessed of hands and arms, ii. 105 Apicius, noted for having ^aught
mankind to suffocate fish in Carthaginian pickle, vi. 182 -- his receipt for
making sauce for the ostrich, v. 59 -- manner of dressing a hare in true Roman
taste, with parsley, rice, vinegar, cumin and coriander seed, iv. 15 Apodal,
the name of the fish without ventral fins, vi. 303 Appendices in the intestines
of birds, v. 16 Appetite, nature, by supplying a variety, has multiplied life
in her productions, v. 79 Arabia, of all the countries in the world, where the
horse runs wild, produces the most beautiful breed, the most generous, swift,
and persevering -- in the rapidity of flight the dogs give up the pursuit, ii.
347 -- method of taking them by traps, ii. 348 -- an Arabian, how poor soever,
is provided of his horse, ii. 349 -- the Arabians first began the management of
horses in the time of sheque Ismael -- manner in which the Arabians feed and
dress their horses, ii. 352 -- they have no house but a tent to live in --
never beat their horses, ii. 351 -- preserve the pedigree of their horses with
care for several ages back, ii. 350 -- into what countries that race of horses
has spread itself, ii. 354, 355 -- the Arabians feast upon young horses, ii.
348. -- keep their horses ready saddled at the tent, from morning till sunset,
to be prepared against all surprise, ii. 353 -- the most adapted country to the
support and production of camels, iv. 303 -- description of the deserts of
Arabia, iv. 305 -- milk and flesh of the camel a part of the nourishment of the
Arabians, iv. 304 -- the mare, foal, husband, wife and children, lie all
together indiscriminately, ii, 351 -- its sandy tempests described, i. 363 --
men and animals buried in the sands of Arabia, preserved from corruption, for
several ages, as if actually embalmed, ii. 275 -- the ass originally a native
of Arabia, ii. 385 Archimedes, discovered the method of determining the purity
of gold, by weighing in water, i. 190 Archipelago, very good horses in its
islands, ii. 360 -- the wild ass found in those islands, particularly Cerigo,
ii. 377 Ardebil, the pastures in those plains excellent for rearing horses, ii.
361 Arequipa, a celebrated burning mountain in Peru, i. 99 Argentine,
description of this fish, vi. 313 Arion, his harp gathered the dolphins to the
ship's side, ii. 168 Aristotle's opinion about the formation of the incipient
animal, ii. 16 -- and mules being sometimes prolific, ii. 375 Arlotto, an
Italian Franciscan friar -- for his sleeping transgressions taken before the
inquisition, and like to be condemned for them, ii. 142, 143 Armadilla, or
Tatou, described -- an inhabitant of South America, iv. 125 -- a harmless
creature, furnished with a peculiar covering for its defense -- attacked
without danger, and liable to persecutions -- is of different sizes; in all
however, the animal is partially covered with a coat of mail, a striking
curiosity in natural history, iv. 125, 126 -- has the same method of protecting
itself as the hedgehog or pangolin -- when attacked, rolls itself up in its
shells, like a ball, and continues so till the danger is over, iv. 127, 128 --
the Indians take it in this form, lay it close to the fire, and oblige it to
unfold -- this animal utterly unknown before the discovery of America, iv. 128,
129 -- does mischief in gardens -- bears the cold of our climate without
inconvenience -- the mole does not burrow swifter than the armadilla -- burrows
deep in the earth, iv. 129, 130 -- expedients used to force them out -- manner
of taking them alive -- sometimes in snares by the sides of rivers, and low
moist places, which they frequent, iv 130, 131 -- never found at any distance
from their retreats -- near a precipice, escapes by rolling itself up, and
tumbling down from rock to rock, without danger or inconvenience, iv. 130 --
its food -- scarce any that do not root the ground like a hog -- a kind of
friendship between them and the rattle-snake, they are frequently found in the
same hole, iv. 131 -- they all resemble each other, as clothed with a shell,
yet differ in size, and in the division of their shell -- the various kinds,
iv. 132, 133 -- the pig-headed sort, the weasel-headed, the kabassou and the
encoubert are the largest, iv. 133 -- generally referred to the tribe of
insects or snails, ii. 313. Arno, the river, a considerable piece of ground
gained at the mouth of it, i. 276 Aro, numbers of birds of paradise seen there,
v. 260 Arse-feet, name our sailors give to birds of the penguin tribe, vi. 92
Arsenius, tutor to the emperor Arcadius, lived an hundred and twenty years, ii.
132 Arts, fault that has infected most of our dictionaries and compilations of
natural history, ii. 307 -- teaching the arts of cruelty equivalent to
committing them, v. 164 Asia, aim of the Asiatics to possess many women, and to
furnish a seraglio their only ambition, ii. 72 -- luster of jewels and splendour
of brilliant colors eagerly sought after by all conditions of men, ii. 98 Asia
Minor, description of its inhabitants, ii. 230 Asiatic, the olive-coloured,
claims the hereditary resemblance to our common parent -- an argument to prove
the contrary, ii. 240 Asp, a kind of serpent, vii. 215 Asphaltum, an injection
of petroleum and an application of asphaltum suffice to make a mummy, ii. 287
Ass and horse, though nearly alike in form, are distinct kinds, different in
natures -- with only one of each kind, both races would be extinguished, ii.
375 -- in the state of nature entirely different, ii. 376 -- wild ass in
greater abundance than the wild horse -- wild ass and the zebra a different
species -- countries where the wild ass is found, ii. 377, 379 -- some run so
swift. ^ew coursers can overtake them -- caught with traps -- taken chiefly for
their flesh and skins, which make that leather called shagreen -- entertainment
of wild asses in Persia seen by Olearius, ii. 377, 378 -- the delicacy of its
flesh a proverb there, ii. 378 -- Galen deems it unwholesome -- asses
originally imported into America by the Spaniards, have run wild, and
multiplied to such numbers as to be a nuisance -- chase of them in the kingdom
of Quito, ii. 379 -- have all the swiftness of horses -- declivities and
precipices do not retard their career -- after the first load, their celerity
leaves them, their dangerous ferocity lost, and they contract the stupid look
and dullness peculiar to the asinine species -- will not permit a horse to live
among them -- always feed together -- and a horse straying where they graze,
they fall upon, and bite and kick him till he be dead, ii. 380 -- their
preference to any vegetable is to the plantane, ii. 381 -- they drink as
soberly as they eat, and never dip the nose into the stream -- fear to wet
their feet, and turn out to avoid the dirty parts of a road -- show no ardour
but for the female, and often die after covering, ii. 382 -- scent an owner at
a distance, and distinguish him in a crowd -- with eyes covered, they will not
stir a step -- when laid down, one eye covered with the grass, and the other
hidden with a stone or other contiguous body, they will not stir, or attempt to
rise, to get free from impediments -- several brought up to perform, and
exhibited at a show, ii. 383 -- suffered to dwindle every generation, and
particularly in England, ii. 384 -- bulk for bulk, an ass stronger than a
horse, and surer footed -- also less apt to start than the horse, ii. 385 --
more healthy than the horse -- Persians cleave their nostrils to give them more
room for breathing ii. 386 -- Spaniards alone know the value of the ass, ii.
385 -- the Spanish jack-ass above fifteen hands high -- the ass originally a
native of Arabia -- warm climates produce the largest and best -- entirely lost
among us during the reign of queen Elizabeth -- Holingshed pretends our land
yields no asses, yet they were common in England before that time -- in Sweden,
they are a sort of rarity -- by the last history of Norway, they had not
reached that country -- in Guinea, they are larger and more beautiful than the
horses of that country -- in Persia, are two kinds -- some sold for forty or
fifty pounds, ii. 385, 386 -- no animal covered with hair less subject to
vermin -- lives till twenty or twenty-five -- sleeps less than the horse, and
never lies down for it, unless much tired -- she-ass crosses fire and water to
protect her young, ii 382 to 386 -- the gimerro bred between the ass and the
bull, ii. 386 -- the size and strength of our asses improved by importation of
Spanish jack-asses, ii. 387 -- destroyed by the South-American bat, called
vampyre, iv. 145 Asafoetida, savage nations delighted with the smell, ii. 181
Assiniboils, lake where the river St. Lawrence takes its rise, i. 216 Assyrian
goat of Gesner, a second variety, iii. 58 Astroites, among coral substances,
viii. 197 Atalantis, an island submersed, was as large as Asia Minor and Syria
-- the fruits of the earth offered without cultivation, i. 134 Athanatus,
instance of his strength, ii. 118 Athelstan prohibited the exportation of mares
and stallions, except as presents, ii. 369 Athenians, quail-fighting a
favorite amusement among them -- abstained from the flesh of this bird, as
unwholesome, because it fed upon the white hellehore -- they reared great
numbers of them for fighting, and staked sums of money, as we do with cocks,
upon the success of the combat, v. 214 -- they had also their cock-matches, v.
163 Atherine, description of this fish, vi. 313 Atmosphere, most disorders
incident to mankind, says Bacon, arise from changes of the atmosphere, vi. 175
Attraction defined, i. 3 -- the sun possessed of the greatest share, i. 4
Avosetta, or scooper, a bird found in Italy -- now and then comes over into
England -- description, and extraordinary shape of its bill, vi. 20 Aurelia,
one of the appearances of the caterpillar, viii. 6, 19 -- laying it in a warm
room, Mr. Reaumur hastened the disclosure of the butterfly, and by keeping it
in an ice house, retarded it -- though it bears a different appearance, it
contains all the parts of the butterfly in perfect formation -- some insects
continue under that form not above ten days, some twenty, some several months,
others for a year together, viii. 26 -- how the butterfly gets rid of that
covering, viii. 28 -- aurelia of the be different from that of the common
caterpillar, viii. 80 Aurora Borealis, or northern light, streams, with
peculiar luster, and a variety of colors round the pole -- its appearance
almost constant in winter -- and when the sun departs for half a year, this
meteor supplies its beams, affording light for all the purposes of existence,
i. 387 Aurora, or the samiri, the smallest and most beautiful of the sapajou
monkies -- its description -- is very tender, delicate, and held in high price,
iv. 236 Auvergne, in France, an amazing mummy dug up at that place, ii. 283
Awk, a bird bred in the island of St. Kilda, vi. 98 Axis, a kind of beautiful
stag -- its description, iii. 123 Azores, serpents, adders, and snakes seen
about these islands by sir Robert Hawkins in 1590, i. 239
B.
Baboon, fierce, malicious, ignorant, and untractable, iv. 209 -- its
description -- impelled by a hatred for the males of the human species, and a
desire for women, iv. 210 -- the chevalier Forbin relates, that in Siam, whole
troops will sally forth, plunder the houses of provisions, and endeavor to
force the women -- manner of robbing an orchard or vineyard at the Cape of Good
Hope, iv. 210, 211 -- the female brings forth one at a time, carries it in her
arms, clinging to her breast, iv. 214 -- survey of the baboon kind, iv. 188 --
at the Cape of Good Hope, the young of these animals are taught to guard
houses, and perform the duty with punctuality, iv. 212 -- they seem insensible
of the mischief they do -- a baboon described by Mr. Buffon, iv. 213 --
lasciviousness predominant -- their food, iv. 214 -- ^re not found to breed in
our climate, iv. 213 -- are not carnivorous -- their liver, like that of a dog,
divided into six lobes -- the largest of the kind is the mandril, iv. 214 --
its description -- displeased, it weeps like a child -- is a native of the Gold
Coast -- that called wanderow chiefly seen in the woods of Ceylon and Malabar
-- its description -- the maimon of Buffon, by Edwards called the pig tail, the
last of the sort -- its description -- a native of Sumatra, iv. 214, 215 Baby,
the name of a dwarf, whose complete history is very accurately related by Mr.
Dabenton, ii. 254 Babyronessa, the Indian hog, its description, iii. 193 to 195
-- travelers call it the hog of Bouro, iii. 192 -- in what manner it escapes
the pursuers, iii. 195 -- has enormous tusks of fine ivory -- less dangerous
than the wild boar, iii. 194 -- the tusks have points directed to the eyes, and
sometimes grow into them -- these animals, in a body, are seen with the wild
boars, with which they are not known to engender -- are easily tamed -- have a
way of reposing different from other animals of the larger kind, by hitching
one of their upper tusks on the branch of a tree, and suffering their whole
body to swing down at ease -- they are fierce and terrible when offended, and
peaceable and harmless when unmolested -- their flesh good to be eaten, but
said to putrefy in a short time -- they chiefly live upon vegetables and the
leaves of trees, iii. 195 -- are found in the island of Borneo, and in other
parts of Asia and Africa, iii. 196 Bacon's observations upon fishes, vi. 175
Badger, a solitary stupid animal, iv. 328 -- forms a winding hole, and remains
in safety at the bottom -- the fox takes possession of the hole quitted by the
badger, or forces it from the retreat by wiles -- surprised by the dogs at a
distance from its hole, it fights with desperate resolution, iv. 329 -- all
that has life is its food -- it sleeps the greatest part of the time, and
though not voracious, keeps fat, particularly in winter -- it keeps the hole
very clear -- the female makes a bed of hay for her young, iv. 328, 329 --
brings forth, in summer, three or four young -- how she feeds them -- the young
are easily tamed -- the old are savage and incorrigible -- are fond of fire,
and often burn themselves dangerously, iv. 329, 330 -- are subject to the
mange, and have a gland under the tail, which scents strongly -- its flesh rank
and ill tasted, iv. 330 Bag, name of the false belly of the oppossum -- its
description, iv. 243 Bag, or pouch of the civet, manner in which the perfume is
taken from it, iii. 391 -- this bag differs from that of the rest of the weasel
kind, and in what, iii. 390 Bait, the best for all kinds of fish is fresh
herring, vi. 256 -- the larger sort will take a living small fish upon the hook
sooner than any other bait, vi. 257 Balance to determine the specific gravity
of metals, i. 190 Bald, women less apt to become bald than men -- Mr. Buffon
thinks they never become bald -- many instances of the contrary among us, ii.
86 Balearic crane, its description, v. 387 -- the real crane of Pliny, v. 386
-- comes from the coast of Africa and Cape de Verd islands, v. 388 -- its
habits -- has been described by the name of sea-peacock -- foreign birds of the
crane kind described, the jabiru, the jabiru-guacu, the anhima, and the buffoon
bird, v. 388, 389 Ball of fire of the bigness of a bomb -- its effects, i. 380
Baltic, the Danes in possession of it, i. 232 Banks of a river, after
inundations, appear above water, when all the adjacent valley is overflown, and
why, i. 202, 203 Banks (Mr.) discovers and describes an extraordinary animal of
the gerbua kind, and calls it kanguroo, in figure resembling, but in size and
other circumstance differing with it, iv. 351 Banana, the elephant eats the
plant to the roots, iv. 259 Barb, an Arabian horse bred in Barbary, ii. 354
Barbs of the whale, or whale-bone, vi. 196 Barbary hen, its description, v. 192
Barble, a flat fish, its growth, vi. 340 Barja, in South America, cattle
destroyed at that place by the American bats called vampyres, iv. 146 Baris, in
Sierra Leona, in Africa, has a kind of apes, which, properly instructed when
young, serve as very useful domestics, iv. 198 Barnacle, imaginary, a shell
fish, vii. 64 Barometer measures the weight of the air -- in what manner, i.
304, et seq. -- no changes in the air without sensible alteration in the
barometer -- the barometer is also serviceable in measuring the heights of
mountains, i. 154, 305, 306 -- when it marks a peculiar lightness in the air,
no wonder that it foretells a storm, and why, i. 352 -- the art of taking the
heights of places by it, a new and ingenious invention, i. 154 -- in what
manner it is composed, i. 304 Barrettier, a famous youth, considered as a
prodigy of learning at the age of fourteen, slept regularly twelve hours in the
twenty-four, ii. 138 Bass, a rocky island in the Firth of Forth, has in every
crag innumerable birds of various sorts, shining more than the stars of heaven
in a serene night, vi. 72 Bath, persons coming out of a warm bath several
ounces heavier than they went in -- warm bath of seawater a kind of relief to
mariners, upon a failure of fresh water at sea, i. 238 Bat, by some reckoned
among birds, ii. 313 -- doubtful among naturalists whether beast or bird -- now
universally take place among quadrupeds, iv. 134 -- Pliny, Gesner, and
Aldrovandus placed it among birds -- scarce in any particular resembles the
bird, except in the power of sustaining itself in the air -- description of the
common sort in England -- its intestines and skeleton, in some measure,
resemble those of mankind, iv. 135 -- makes its first appearance early in
summer, and begins its flight in the evening, iv. 136 -- is seen to skim along
the surface of waters -- feeds upon gnats, moths, and nocturnal insects of
every kind, which it pursues open mouthed -- its flight laborious, irregular,
and, if interrupted, not readily followed by a second elevation -- usually
taken, when striking against an object, it falls to the ground -- even in the
summer, it sleeps the greatest part of the time -- its retreat -- continues in
a torpid state during winter -- is usually hanging by its hooked claws to the
roofs of caves, unaffected by all change of weather, iv. 136, 137 -- is
destroyed particularly by the owl -- the bat couples and brings forth in summer
from two to five young at a time, iv. 138 -- the female has two nipples forward
on the breast, as in the human kind, and this a motive for Linnaeus to give it
the title of a primas, to rank it in the same order with mankind -- the female
makes no nest for her young -- when she begins to grow hungry, and finds a
necessity of stirring abroad, she takes her little ones and sticks them by
their hooks against the sides of her apartment, and there they immoveably cling
and patiently wait her return -- less similitude to the race of birds than of
quadrupeds, iv. 138, 139 -- great labor in flying soon fatigues and tires it
in less than an hour -- its petty thefts upon the fat of bacon, iv. 140 --
found in the holes deserted by the wood-pecker, v. 253 -- long-eared bat, iv.
140 -- horse-shoe bat -- rhinoceros bat -- a larger race of bats in the East
and West Indies truly formidable -- a dangerous enemy -- when united in flocks
they become dreadful, iv. 140, 141 -- they are eat -- the negroes of the
African coasts will not eat them though starving, iv. 141 -- on the African
coast they fly in such numbers, as to obscure the setting sun -- the rousette,
or great bat of Madagascar, is found along the coasts of Africa and Malabar,
where it is often seen about the size of a large hen -- destroys the ripe
fruits, and sometimes settles upon animals, and man himself, iv. 142 -- destroy
fowls and domestic animals, unless preserved with the utmost care, and often
fasten upon the inhabitants, attack them in the face, and make terrible wounds,
iv. 143 -- the ancients have taken their idea of harpies from these fierce and
voracious creatures, equally deformed, greedy, uncleanly, and cruel -- the bat,
called the American vampyre -- its description by Ulloa -- purport of his
account confirmed by various travelers, who all agree that it has a faculty of
drawing blood from persons sleeping, and destroying them before they awake, iv.
144 -- a strong difficulty remains how they make the wound -- Ulloa and
Buffon's opinions, iv. 145 -- suppose the animal endowed with a strong power of
suction; and that, without inflicting any wound, by continuing to draw, it
enlarges the pores of the skin, so that the blood at length passes -- they are
one of the great pests of South America, iv. 146 -- bats as big as rabbits, ii.
6 To Bay, said of a stag, when he turns his head against the hounds, iii. 114
Beagle, harrier and hound seem all of the same kind, iii. 283 -- transported
into Spain or Barbary, will there be converted into the land or water spaniel,
iii. 284 Beak, how that of animals is produced, ii. 101 Beam, by hunters meant
that part which bears the antlers, iii. 114 Beams, those of the sun shining
upon the fire, put it out, and why, i. 333, 334 -- darting directly upon us,
without the medium of the air, would burn us up at once, or blind us with
effulgence, i. 334. Bear, description of the ant-bear and its habits, iv. 339,
341 Bears, in cold frozen regions of the north not smaller than in milder
countries, ii. 6 -- the North American Indians anoint their skins with fat of
bears, ii. 236 -- the bears now and then make depredations upon the reindeer,
iii. 169 -- in Greenland do not change color, iii. 356 -- three different
kinds, iv. 321 -- the black of America does not reject animal food, as believed
-- places where they are found -- retreat of the brown bear, iv. 322 -- a
vulgar error, that during winter, the brown bear lives by sucking its paws; it
seems rather to subsist then upon the exuberance of its former flesh -- the
male and female do not inhabit the same den, and seldom are seen together, but
upon the accesses of genial desire, iv. 323 -- care of the female for her young
-- the bear, when tamed, seems gentle and placid; yet still to be distrusted
and managed with caution, being often treacherous and resentful without a
cause, iv. 323 -- is capable of a degree of instruction -- when come to
maturity, can never be tamed -- methods of taking them, iv. 324, 327 -- their
paws and hams a great delicacy, iv. 324, 327 -- the white placed in the coldest
climates, grows larger than in the temperate zones, and remains master of the
icy mountains in Spitzbergen and Greenland, iv. 325 -- unable to retreat when
attacked with fire arms, they make a fierce and long resistance, iv. 326 --
they live upon fish and seals, their flesh is too strong for food -- are often
seen on ice-floats, several leagues at sea, though bad swimmers, iv. 327 -- the
white sometimes jumps into a Greenlander's boat, and if it does not overset it,
sits down calmly and like a passenger, suffers itself to be rowed along, iv.
326 -- hunger makes it swim after fish -- often a battle ensues between a bear
and a morse, or a whale, and the latter generally prove victorious, iv. 327
Beards, Americans taking great pains to pluck theirs up by the roots, the under
part, and all but the whiskers, therefore supposed to have no hair growing on
that part -- Linnaeus himself has fallen into this mistake, ii. 97 -- different
customs of men, in the manner of wearing their beards, ii. 95, 6, 7 Beasts are
most fierce and cruel in all countries where men are most barbarous, ii. 330
Beasts of chase, in the reigns of William Rufus, and Henry the First, it was
less criminal to destroy one of the human species than a beast of chase --
sacred edifices thrown down, and turned to waste, to make room for beasts of
chase, iii. 110 Beasts of prey, seldom devour each other -- they chiefly seek
after the deer or the goat -- their usual method of hunting, ii. 321 Beaver,
known to build like an architect, and rule like a citizen, ii. 328 -- its fore
parts taste like flesh, and the hinder like the fish it feeds on, iii. 192 -- a
remaining monument of brutal society, iv. 157 -- Its qualities, taken from its
fellows, and kept in solitude or domestic tameness, iv. 158, 159 -- resists
only when driven to extremity, and fights when its speed cannot avail -- the
only quadrupede that has a flat broad tail, covered with scales, serving as a
rudder to direct its motions in the water, iv. 159 -- the sole quadruped with
membranes between the toes on the hind feet, and none on the fore feet, iv. 159
-- the only animal in its fore parts entirely resembling a quadruped, and in
its hinder parts approaches the nature of fishes, having a scaly tail -- its
description -- has but one vent for the emission of excrements and urine, iv
159, 160 -- they assemble about the months of June and July, make a society to
continue the greatest part of the year -- form a company of above two hundred
-- fix their abode by the side of a lake or river -- cut with their teeth a
tree thicker than a man's body, iv. 160, 161 -- amazing works and mansion
houses -- convey their materials by water, iv. 162 mix clay and dry grass
together, work it into a mortar, and with their tails plaster their work
within and without, iv. 164 -- their walls perpendicular, and two feet thick --
their piers fourscore or an hundred feet long, and ten or twelve feet thick at
the base, iv. 161 -- their dikes ten and twelve feet thick at the foundation --
their apartments round, or oval, and divided into three stories, one above the
other, iv. 163 -- visited too often by men, they work only in the night time,
or abandon the place, and seek a safer situation, iv. 163 -- four hundred
reside in one mansion house, divided into a number of apartments, having
communication with each other, iv 165 -- their works in the northern parts
finished in August or September -- in summer they are epicures -- their
provisions for the winter season -- they drive piles into the earth, to fence
and fortify their habitation against the wind and water, iv. 164 -- cut down
branches three to ten feet in length -- the largest are conveyed to their
magazines by a whole body -- the smallest by one only -- each taking a
different way, and having a walk assigned him, that no one should interrupt
another in his work, iv. 165, 166 -- woodyards larger or smaller, in proportion
to the number in family, iv. 166 -- manner of catching them in snares or by
surprise, iv. 167 -- they swim with their mortar on their tails, and their
stakes between their teeth, iv. 162 -- their works damaged by force of water,
or feet of huntsmen, instantly repaired, iv. 163 Beauty, every country has
peculiar ideas of beauty -- extraordinary tastes for beauty, ii. 76 -- every
nation, how barbarous soever, has peculiar arts of heightening beauty --
several of these arts, ii 78 -- a modern lady's face formed exactly like the
Venus of Medicis, or the sleeping Vestal, would scarce be considered as a
beauty, except by the lovers of antiquity -- less in the object than in the eye
of the beholder -- superior beauty of our ancestors not easily comparable, ii.
265 Beccafigo, a bird of the sparrow kind, v. 314 Bed of a river, an increase
of water there increases its rapidity, except in cases of inundation, and why
-- such bed left dry for some hours by a violent storm blowing directly against
the stream, 1. 207 Beds, the earth every where in beds over beds, and each of
them maintaining exactly the same thickness, i. 58 Be, a ruminating insect, or
seemingly so -- its stomach is composed of muscular fibers, iii. 6 --
operations studied for two thousand years are still incompletely known, viii.
65 -- Reaumur's account sufficiently wonderful -- many of the facts held
dubious by those conversant with the subject -- some declared not to have
existence in nature -- three different kinds of bees, viii. 65, 66 -- common
working bees neither male nor female -- queen bees lay all the eggs that are
hatched in a season -- structure of the working be, particularly of its trunk,
which extracts the honey from flowers, viii 66, 67 -- manner of building their
cells, viii. 69 -- in one day, they make cells upon each other enough to
contain three thousand bees, viii. 70 -- description of those cells, viii. 69,
70 -- the combs made by insensible degrees, not at once as some imagine, viii.
72 -- the cells for the young and for the drones -- that for the queen be the
largest of all, viii. 73 -- those for honey are deeper than the rest -- that
not the only food upon which they subsist -- manner of anticipating the
progress of vegetation, viii 74 -- the be has a stomach for wax as well as
honey -- bee-bread -- treacle for food of bees in winter -- what part of the
flower has the honey, viii 74, 75 -- sting of the be, viii. 68 -- any wanting
food, bends down its trunk to the be from whom it is expected, which then
opens its honey-bag, and lets some drops fall into the other's mouth, viii. 70
-- numerous as the multitude of bees appear in a swarm, they all owe their
origin to one parent, called the queen-bee, viii. 76 -- opening the body of a
queen, the eggs at one time found to amount to five thousand -- the queen
easily distinguished from the rest -- great fertility of the queen, and the
great attentions paid to her, controverted by recent observers, viii. 77 --
they leave a cell to every egg and destroy the rest, viii. 78 -- great care and
affection for the young, viii. 79 -- in about twenty days after the egg was
laid, the be was completely formed, and fitted to undergo the fatigues of its
state -- the cell being prepared, the animal soon transformed into an aurelia
different from that of the common caterpillar, viii. 80 -- when they begin to
break their prisons, above a hundred are excluded in one day, viii. 81 --
dreadful battles often ensue between the young brood and their progenitors,
viii. 82 -- signs previous to their migrations -- after the migration, the
queen being settled, the swarm follows, and in a quarter of an hour, the whole
body is at ease, viii. 84 -- sometimes sacrifice their queen; but never when
the hive is full of wax and honey, viii. 84, 85 -- the working sort kill the
drones in the worm state, in the cell, and eject their bodies from the hive
among the general carnage -- upwards of forty thousand bees found in a single
hive -- instances of expedition in working -- in the first fifteen days, they
make more wax than during the rest of the year -- a hive sending out several
swarms in the year, the first always the best and most numerous, viii. 86 -- a
kind of floating bee-house used in France, viii. 87 Bees, in other countries --
in Guadaloupe are less by half than in Europe, and have no sting, viii. 89, 90
-- sometimes there are two or three queens to a swarm; then the weaker deserted
for the more powerful protector -- the deserted queen does not survive the
defeat -- is destroyed by the jealous rival; and till this be done, the bees
never go out to work, viii. 84 -- at Guadaloupe their cells are in hollow
trees, sometimes with a sort of waxen-house, shaped like a pear, in which they
lodge their honey, and lay their eggs, viii. 90 -- their honey never congeals,
is fluid as oil, and has the color of amber -- in the tropical climates are
black bees without a sting -- their wax is soft, and only used for medicinal
purposes, not being hard enough for candles, as in Europe -- whether the humble
bees have a queen or not, there is one much larger than the rest, without
wings, without hair, all over black, like polished ebony -- this views all the
works, from time to time, viii. 87 -- their habits -- the honey gathered by the
humble bees neither so fine, so good, nor the wax so clear, or so capable of
fusion, as those of the common bees, viii. 92. Leaf-cutting Bees make their
nest, and lay their eggs among bits of leaves, viii. 94 Wall-bees, so called,
because they make their nests in walls -- the male and females are of a size --
the former without a sting, viii. 94, 95 Wood-bee -- Mason-bee, viii. 92, 93 --
Ground-bee builds its nest in the earth -- the patience and assiduity of their
labor, 93 Beetles, their general characteristics, viii. 128, 137 -- their
kinds distinguished from each other, viii. 129 -- description of the
dorr-beetle, or the May-bug, viii. 136 -- how the two sexes in the May-bug are
distinguished from each other -- season of their coupling, viii. 131 -- the
female bores a hole into the ground, where to deposit her burden; and when
lightened of it ascends from the hole, to live as before -- their eggs --
description of the insect, and of its manner of life in the worm-state --
continues in that state for more than three years, changing every year its
skin, and living under the ground without eyes -- in what manner it assumes the
form of a chrysalis, viii. 133 -- time when it becomes winged, and completely
formed -- the old one never survives the season -- and dies from the severity
of cold in winter, viii. 134 -- its habits and food, when completely formed --
number of their eggs, viii. 135 -- rooks and hogs particularly fond of them,
and devour them in great numbers, viii. 136 -- instances of great devastations
made by the May-bug -- description and habits of that beetle, which the
Americans call the tumble-dung, viii. 137, 138 -- the insect called king of the
beetles, viii. 138 -- description of the elephant-beetle -- the largest of this
kind hitherto known, viii. 139 -- a ruminating insect, or seems to ruminate,
iii. 6 Beggars, a question in the schools, which the most happy man, the beggar
by night, and king by day; or the beggar by day, and king by night, ii. 139
Belcher (Mr.) the first who discovered the circulation of the blood through the
bones -- experiments to this purpose, ii. 194 Belegme (Roger de) the first who
attempted to mend our native breed of horses, ii. 370 Bell, the great
diving-bell improved by doctor Halley -- he could write or read in it when the
sea was clear, and especially when the sun shone, i. 291 Bell, when the stag
cries, he is said to bell, iii. 113 Bells, their vibrations not heard under the
receiver of an air-pump, i. 334 Belly, a minute description of the false belly
of the oppossum, iv. 243, et seq. Berries, the Laplanders drink water, in which
juniper berries have been infused, ii. 216 Bewailer, or the sai, a monkey of
the new continent, iv. 236 Bezoar, German bezoar, iii. 69 Bezour-goat, the
oriental bezoar, iii. 74, et seq. -- cow-bezoar, and monkey-bezoar, iii. 76 --
hog-bezoar, iii. 77 Billitting, a name given by huntsmen to the excrement of
the fox, iii. 328 Birch, hares are particularly fond of it, iv. 7 Birds, all
produced from the egg, ii. 26 -- their lower eyelid alone has motion, ii. 85
-- have the neck longer than any other kind of animals -- those which have
short claws, have also short necks -- those that have long claws have the neck
in proportion, ii. 102 -- have a power of disgorging food to feed their young
-- ruminating birds, iii. 5 -- many kinds which the dog will not touch, iii.
304 -- hunters often informed by the birds of the place of retreat of the fox,
iii. 331 -- a flock of small birds often alarms every thicket, and directs the
hunter to the martin, iii. 372 -- surpass fishes and insects in structure of
body, and in sagacity, v. 2 -- their anatomy and conformation, v. 3, et seq. --
compared to a ship making way through water, v. 4 -- are furnished with a gland
behind, containing a proper quantity of oil -- to what purpose -- description
of their feathers, v. 6 -- the pectoral muscles of quadrupeds trifling to those
of birds -- choose to rise against the wind -- and why, v. 8 -- all, except the
nocturnal, have the head smaller, and less in proportion to the body, than
quadrupeds, v. 9 -- their sight exceeds most other animals, and excels in
strength and precision, v. 10 -- have no external ear standing out from the
head -- the feathers encompassing the ear-holes, supply the defect of the
exterior ear -- the extreme delicacy of their sense of hearing, is easily
proved by their readiness in learning tunes, or repeating words, and the
exactness of their pronunciation -- their delicacy in the sense of smelling --
instance of it in ducks, v. 11 -- the tail guides their flight like a rudder,
and assists them either in the ascent, or descent, v. 12 -- wonderful internal
conformation -- the windpipe often makes many convolutions within the body of
the bird, and is then called the labyrinth, v. 13 -- of what use these
convolutions are, no naturalist has been able to account -- this difference
obtains in birds to all appearance of the same species -- whence some derive
that loud and various modulation in their warblings is not easily accounted for
-- birds have much louder voices, in respect to their bulk, than animals of
other kinds -- all have properly but one stomach, but different in different
kinds, v. 14 -- the organs of digestion in a manner reversed in birds -- why
they pick up sand, gravel, and other hard substances -- most have two
appendices or blind guts -- in quadrupeds always found single, v. 16 -- all
birds want a bladder for urine -- their urine differs from that of other
animals, v. 17 -- effects of the annual molting which birds suffer -- their
molting time artificially accelerated -- and how, v. 18 -- the manner in which
nature performs the operation of molting, v. 19 -- their molting season, v. 20
-- many live with fidelity together for a length of time -- when one dies, the
other shares the same fate soon after -- the male of wild birds as happy in the
young brood as the female, v. 23 -- nothing exceeds their patience while
hatching, v. 26 -- Addison's observations to this purpose, v. 27 -- great care
and industry in providing subsistence for their young -- they feed each of the
young in turn -- and why -- perceiving their nests or young to have been
handled, they abandon the place by night, and provide a more secure, though
less commodious retreat -- the young taught the art of providing for their
subsistence, v. 29 -- those hatched and sent out earliest in the season the
most strong and vigorous -- they endeavor to produce early in the spring, and
why -- efforts for a progeny when their nests are robbed, v. 30 -- such as
would have laid but two or three eggs, if their eggs be stolen, will lay ten or
twelve -- the greatest number remain in the districts where they have been
bred; and are excited to migration only by fear, climate, or hunger, v. 31 --
cause of the annual emigrations of birds, v. 32 -- times of migrations, v. 32,
35, 37 -- in what order performed, v. 35 -- follow the weather rather than the
country, and go on as they perceive the atmosphere more suitable to their wants
and dispositions, v. 36, 37 -- in all countries, longer-lived than quadrupeds
or insects of the same climate, v. 39 -- surprising age of swans and geese --
plumage and voice of birds in different zones, v. 38 -- all less than
quadrupeds -- the greatest of one class surpass the greatest of the other in
magnitude, v. 39 -- causes of the great variety in the middle order of birds --
the ostrich is the greatest of birds -- the humming-bird the smallest -- wild
birds generally of the same magnitude and shape, v. 40 -- inferior to
quadrupeds in docility, v. 41 -- the number already known above eight hundred
-- difference between land-birds and water-fowls, v. 42, 43 -- description of
birds of the rapacious kind -- the pie kind, v. 44 -- the poultry kind -- the
sparrow kind -- the duck kind -- the crane kind, v. 45 -- the cormorant the
best fisher, vi. 69 -- the nauseous bird, or dodo, v. 77 -- powers of
land-birds of the rapacious kind to obtain their food -- sight of such as prey
by day surprisingly quick -- such as ravage by night have their sight fitted to
see in darkness with precision, v. 80 -- inhabit the most lonely places and
desert mountains -- appearing in cultivated plains, or the warbling groves, is
for depredation -- every order of carnivorous birds seek for those of the size
approaching their own, v. 81 -- the carnivorous kinds only breed annually, and
are less fruitful than others -- breed but few at a time, v. 82 -- where
supplies of food are difficult, the old soon drive the brood from the nest to
shift for themselves, and often destroy them in a fury caused by hunger --
almost all birds of prey unsociable -- the male and female when necessary to
each other live together; but they most usually prowl alone, v. 83 -- birds
with crooked beaks and talons are solitary -- all males of prey are less, and
weaker than the females -- the females are of a greater size, more beautiful
and lovely for shape and colors, stronger, more fierce and generous, than the
males -- it may be necessary to be thus superior, to provide for herself and
her young -- these birds are lean and meagre -- their flesh is stringy and
ill-tasted, soon corrupting, and flavoured of that animal upon which they
subsist, v. 84 -- Belonius asserts, many people like the flesh of the vulture
and falcon, and dress them for eating; and that the osprey, when young, is
excellent food -- five kinds of land birds of a rapacious nature -- whence
their distinctive mark, v. 85 -- bird of heaven, name given by the ancients to
the eagle, v. 90 -- the most formidable birds of prey respect the butcher-bird,
v. 134 -- the digestion of such as live upon mice, lizards, or the like food,
not very perfect, v. 142 -- father Kircher set the voices of birds to music, v.
143 -- domestic birds, of the poultry kind, maintained in our yards, are of
foreign extraction, v. 151 -- the wilder species cooped or caged, pine away,
grow gloomy, and some refuse all sustenance -- the poultry kind alone grow fat,
v. 154 -- climate, food, and captivity, three very powerful agents in the
alterations in the habits, and the very form of birds -- of all birds the cock
the oldest companion of mankind, and the first reclaimed from the forest, v.
158 -- also the Persian bird of Aristophanes, v. 161 -- description of the
tamis, or the bird of Numidia, v. 192 -- the bustard the largest land-bird,
native of Britain, v. 194 -- none secures its young better from external injury
than the toucan, v. 246 -- God's bird, the bird of paradise, v. 260 -- the
pigeon for it is size has the largest crop, v. 288 -- parakeets the most
beautiful in plumage, and the most talkative birds in nature, v. 281 -- small
birds mark out a territory to themselves, which they permit none of their own
species to remain in, v. 301 -- at some season of the year, all small birds
migrate from one county to another, or from more inland provinces toward the
shore -- months of their migrations, v. 302, 303 -- Autumn the principal season
for catching these wanderers -- the nets, and the method of catching them --
flur-birds, v. 304 -- singing among birds universally the prerogative of the
male -- small birds fight till one yields his life with the victory -- two male
birds strive in song, till the loudest silences the other; during the
contention, the female sits an attentive silent auditor, and often rewards the
loudest songster with her company during the season, v. 307 -- the male, while
his mate is hatching, sits upon some neighboring tree, to watch and to sing,
v. 308 -- the nest of small birds warmer than of the larger -- small birds
having finished their nests, nothing exceeds the cunning they employ to conceal
it -- worms and insects the first food of all birds of the sparrow kind, v 309
-- how birds of the sparrow kind bring forth and hatch their young, v. 310 --
manner of life during the rigours of winter, v. 311 -- the male of small birds
not finding a mate of his own species, flies to one of another like him, left
out in pairing, v. 313 -- a mixed species between a goldfinch and a
canary-bird, between a linner and a lark; these breed frequently together, and
produce not, like the mules among quadrupeds, a race incapable of breeding
again, but one as fruitful as their parents, v. 312, 313 -- various birds of
the sparrow kind, v. 314, 315 -- many plants propagated from the depositions of
birds, v. 316 -- many of those kinds, which are of passage in England,
permanent in other countries; and some with us constant residents, in other
kingdoms have the nature of birds of passage -- instances of it, v. 318, 319 --
the heron commits the greatest devastation in fresh waters, v. 394 -- the
flamingo has the largest tongue, vi. 15 -- birds of various sorts and sizes,
sizes, more than the stars in a serene night, seen in the rock of the Bass, in
the Firth of Forth, vi. 72 -- none make a more indifferent figure upon land, or
a more beautiful in the water, than the swan, vi. 113 -- of all birds known, it
is the longest in the shell, vi. 119 -- an incontestible proof that birds have
their manners rather from nature than education, vi. 127 Bird-catchers, sport
by counterfeiting the cry of the owl, v. 146 -- Nets for, and method of taking
small birds, v. 304 Biscayneers, were in possession of the whale-fishery on the
coasts of Greenland, in the beginning of the fourteenth century -- their method
of taking the whale, vi. 205, 206. Bison and Urus, names of descendants of one
common stock, iii. 15 -- error of the naturalists upon this point -- the cow
and bison are animals of the same kind -- description of the bison, iii. 17 --
it is supposed by Klein and Buffon no more than another name for the bonasus,
iii. 18 -- the breed found in all the southern parts of the world, iii. 20 --
that breed more expert and docile than ours -- many bend their knees to take
burdens up or set them down -- the respect for them in India degenerated into
adoration -- it is nimble of foot -- is esteemed by the Hottentots -- assists
them in attending their flocks and guarding them against invaders -- is taught
to combat the enemies of the nation, and every army of the Hottentots is
furnished with a herd of them, iii. 21, et seq. -- they procure the Hottentots
an easy victory before they strike a blow -- lives in the same cottage with its
master, and when it dies, a new one is chosen to succeed it by a council of the
old men of the village, and is then joined with a veteran of its own kind, from
whom it learns, becomes social and diligent, and is taken for life into
friendship and protection -- the bisons are found to differ from each other in
several parts of the world -- some have horns, some are without, iii. 22 --
they are equally tractable and gentle when tamed, iii. 23 -- and are furnished
with a fine, lustrous, soft hair, more beautiful than that of our own breed --
their hump of different sizes, weighing from forty to fifty pounds, more or
less -- cuts and tastes somewhat like a dressed udder -- the bisons of Malabar,
Abyssinia, Madagascar, Arabia, Africa, and America -- in the course of a few
generations, the hump wears away, iii. 23, 24 -- its description -- the bison
and the cow breed among each other, iii. 25, 26 -- the grunting or Siberian
cow, and the little African cow or zebu are different races of the bison, iii.
32 Bitch, a pregnant bitch, so placed by Mr. Buffon, that her puppies were
brought forth in warm water, ii. 53 Bitches, one forgotten in a country house
lived forty days without any other nourishment than the wool of a quilt she had
torn to pieces, iii. 304, 305 Bittern, or mire-drum, the solemnity of its
evening-call cannot be described by words -- they are calls to courtship or of
connubial felicity -- it differs from the heron chiefly in color -- its
windpipe fitted for the sound -- opinions concerning the cause of its boomings,
vi. 2, 3 -- never utters its call in domestic captivity, vi. 3 -- its residence
-- a retired timorous animal -- its food, nest, and eggs, vi. 4 -- in three
days, leads its little ones to their food -- differences between the bittern
and the heron -- its hollow boom considered by the vulgar as the presage of
some sad event -- instance of it -- its flesh greatly esteemed among the
luxurious, vi. 4, 5 -- it seldom rises but when almost trod upon -- at the
latter end of autumn, in the evening, its wonted indolence forsakes it -- is
then seen rising in a spiral ascent, till quite lost from the view, making a
singular noise different from its former boomings -- names given to this bird
by the Greeks and Latins, vi. 5 Bivalve shells, vii. 12 -- all the kinds
hermaphrodite, yet require no assistance toward impregnation, vii. 41 --
particularly in these shellfish the pearls are found, vii. 53 Blackbird
sometimes seen all over white -- its eggs and nest, v. 321 Blackbird, of the
sparrow kind, v. 314 Black-cap, bird of the sparrow kind, v. 317 -- prized by
some for its singing, and is also called the mock nightingale, v. 335 Blacks,
whence originally their flat noses, ii. 239 -- black parents have procreated
two white negroes, ii. 240 -- conjectural opinion that the blacks are a race of
people bred from one man accidentally black, ii. 233 -- the climate a cause
obvious and sufficient to produce blackness, ii. 234 -- nothing satisfactory
discovered upon the cause producing it in human complexions -- opinion of sir
Thomas Brown upon the subject, ii. 235 Bladder, birds have no bladder for
urine, v. 17 -- description of the air-bladder, and its use, in fishes, vi.
171, 175 -- some have no bladder, vi. 174 Blennius, or Blenny, description of
this fish, vi. 306 -- it brings forth two or three hundred at a time, all alive
and playing round the parent, vi. 177 Blind, such as live in countries
generally covered with snow become blind, ii. 160 -- the mole not blind, iv. 92
Blindworm, its description, vii. 221 Blood, arterial blood immediately mixed
with air in the lungs, is of a fine florid scarlet color -- that of the veins
returning to the heart is of a blackish crimson hue -- whence this difference
of color proceeds not well understood, i. 332 -- the blood circulates through
the bones, as through every other part of the body -- Mr. Belcher the first who
discovered it -- his experiment to this purpose, ii. 194 -- the heat of the
blood in man and other animals about thirty degrees above congelation -- in the
marmout, and other animals which sleep the winter, it is not above ten degrees,
iv. 45 -- blood of the reindeer preserved in small casks for sauce with the
marrow in spring, iii. 167 Blue-bird described, v. 321 -- its residence -- is
rarely caught -- its docility -- speaks and whistles at the word of command --
manner of taking it, v. 322 Blue cat, described, iii. 211, 212 Blushing, whence
it proceeds, ii. 93 Wild boar, varies not his color as dogs of the domestic
kind, iii. 172 -- description -- he plows the ground like a furrow -- his tusks
seen almost a foot long -- they differ from those of the elephant in that they
never fall, iii. 172, 173 -- when the boars come to a state of maturity, they
dread no single creature -- their position, when attacked -- the manner of
hunting them, iii. 173, 174 -- when killed, the testicles cut off to prevent
their tainting the flesh, iii. 175 -- was formerly a native of our country --
William the Conqueror punished with the loss of their eyes, such as killed it
in his forests -- at present the wild breed is extinct, iii. 180 -- the Canary
boar described, iii. 196 -- the tusks being broken away, the animal abates its
fierceness and venery, and nearly the same effect as castration is produced,
iii. 197 -- does not fly the approach of the lion -- combat of a lion and a
wild boar, in a meadow near Algiers, iii. 226 Bobak, name of the marmout in
Poland, iv. 48. Bodies, why some light bodies swim, and ponderous bodies sink,
i. 189 -- the deeper a body sinks, the greater the resistance of the depressed
fluid beneath -- how then, after it is got a certain way, does it sink at all,
i. 191 -- animal bodies left to putrefy, produce air copiously, i. 337 --
symmetry of the human body -- the body of a well-shaped man ought to be square,
ii. 79, 80 -- human body often found to differ from itself in size, ii. 110 --
instance of it, ii. 108 -- the cause -- differs also from itself in weight, ii.
110 -- instances of it, ii. 109 those parts furnished with the greatest
quantity of nerves, are first in formation, ii. 146 -- the tone of a sonorous
body made to depend upon the number of its vibrations, and not the force, is
taking an effect for a cause, ii. 164 -- suffering is but to a certain degree
-- torture becoming excessive, destroys itself; and the mind ceases to
perceive, when the body can no longer endure, ii. 207 Boerhaave taxed with
marking out to his pupils a little ridge of hills in Holland, as mountains of
no small consideration, i. 136 Boiguacu, the largest of the serpent kind in
South America -- sometimes forty feet in length, ii. 6 -- description of this
creature, vii. 226 Bonasus, supposed by Klein and Buffon another name for the
bison, iii. 18 Bones, in the embryo, soft almost as the muscles and flesh, ii.
193 -- hard as the bones seem, the blood holds its current through them, as
through other parts of the body -- this was first accidentally discovered by
Mr. Belcher -- experiment made to this purpose, ii. 194 -- in old age, more
solid, also more brittle, and why, ii. 195 -- bread of the Laplanders composed
of the bones of fishes, pounded and mixed with the inside tender bark of the
pine tree, ii. 216 -- fossile bones found on the banks of the Ohio, in Peru,
and Brasil, iv. 282, 283 -- fish of the same kind have the same number of
bones, vi. 318 -- a vulgar way of speaking, that fishes are at some seasons
more bony than at others -- those small, lean, and with many fins are the most
bony, vi. 319 number of bones in spinous fishes always in proportion to the
number and size of the fins, vi. 318, 319 Bonet-Chinois, Mr. Buffon's name of a
monkey, supposed a variety of that called malbrouk, iv. 233 Bonito, description
of this fish, vi. 314 Booby, name given by our seamen to birds of the penguin
tribe, vi. 96 Borandians, description of them, ii. 213, 214 Boristhenes, or
Nieper, a river, its course and source, i. 210 Borneo, the natives hunt the
ouran-outang in the same manner as the elephant or the lion, iv. 203 Baroch, in
the kingdom of Cambaya, flocks of peacocks seen in the fields near that city,
v. 175 Bosphorus, (the Thracian) was the first appropriated, by granting to
such as were in possession of its shore the right of fishing in it, i. 232
Bottom of the sea in some parts not found, and why, i. 290 -- that of the Red
Sea, a forest of submarine plants, i. 288 -- that of the sea near America
covered with vegetables, i. 289 -- a map of the bottom of the sea between
Africa and America, by M. Buache, i. 290 Bouro, island in the East Indies,
where the babirouessa, or Indian hog, is principally found -- hog of Bouro, the
name given by travelers to the babirouessa, iii. 192 Bowels of the ruminating
animals considered as an elaboratory with vessels in it, iii. 3 Boyuna of
Ceylon, a kind of serpent, vii. 223 Brain and spinal marrow the first seen in
the embryo, ii. 146 -- earth-worm entirely without it, viii. 168 -- some
animals live without their brain for weeks, viii. 170 Brambling, bird of the
sparrow kind, v. 315, 317 Bramins of India have a power of smelling equal to
most creatures -- they smell the water they drink, though to us quite
inodorous, ii. 180 Brasil, black clothes worn there soon turn of an iron-colour
-- kept in the shops, preserve their proper hue, i. 314 -- the Brasilian
rabbit, in shape like the English, has no tail -- does not burrow -- is not
above twice the size of a dormouse, iv. 54 -- duck described, vi. 130 Bread,
twelve ounces of it, and nothing but water, the common allowance, for four and
twenty hours, among the primitive Christians of the East, ii. 132 -- that of
the Laplanders composed of bones of fishes, pounded and mixed with the inside
tender bark of the pine tree, ii. 216 Bream, description of the sea-bream, vi.
308 Breasts in women larger than in men -- milk found in breasts of men as well
as of women, ii. 102 -- black women's breasts, after bearing one child, hang
down below the navel -- it is customary among them to suckle the child at their
backs, throwing the breast over the shoulder, ii. 228 Breath of the lion is
very offensive, iii. 224. -- manner of breathing in fishes, vi. 170 Breed, the
Spartan or Molossian breed of dogs, iii. 295 -- Roger de Belegme, earl of
Shrewsbury, the first who made attempts toward the mending our native breed of
horses, ii. 370 -- Spaniards take all precautions to improve the breed of
jackasses, ii. 385 Breeze from sea increases gradually till twelve, sinks away,
and totally hushed at five -- upon its ceasing, the land-breeze begins,
increases till twelve at night, and is succeeded in the morning by the
sea-breeze -- cause of these two breezes -- sometimes these sea and land
breezes come at all hours -- the land and sea-breezes on the coasts of Malabar
and at Congo, i. 350, 351 -- constant breeze produced by the melting of snows,
i. 347 Brisson, his method of classing animals, ii. 298 Bristol, a citizen of
it who ruminated his food, iii. 6 Britons, the ancient, considered the hare as
an unclean animal, and religiously abstained from it, iv. 14 -- the cock a
forbidden food among them, v. 161 Broches, the horns of the stag the first
year, iii. 113 Brock, the stag of the third year, iii. 113 Brown (sir Thomas)
hoped one day to produce children by the same method as trees, ii. 26 -- his
opinion upon the cause of blackness in human complexions, ii. 235 Brun (Le)
giving a painter directions about the passions, places the principal expression
of the face in the eyebrows, ii. 84 Brush, the name given by huntsmen to the
tail of the fox, iii. 328 Brussels, in the Museum there, a creature covered
with feathers and hair, said to be bred between a rabbit and a hen, iv. 15
Brutes, in those countries where men are most barbarous and stupid, brutes are
most active and sagacious, iv. 231 Buache (M.) gives a map of the bottom of the
sea between Africa and America, i. 290 Bubalus, an animal partaking of the
mixed natures of the cow, the goat, and the deer, iii. 79 -- its description --
has often been called the Barbary cow, from which it differs widely, iii. 80
Bubalus, properly a gazelle of Africa, iii. 149 Bubalus of the ancients,
supposed of the cow kind by Buffon, placed among the lower class of ruminant
quadrupeds, iii. 18 Buccinums, one or two of them viviparous, vii. 30 Buck,
capable of propagating at the age of one year -- one buck sufficient for an
hundred and fifty goats -- becomes old before his seventh year, iii. 55 --
hunting the buck and the stag performed in the same manner in England, iii. 112
-- number of names invented by hunters for this animal -- does not change his
layer, like the stag -- manner of hunting him is much the same as that of
stag-hunting, iii. 128 Buck-goat produces with the ewe an animal that, in two
or three generations, returns to the sheep, retaining no mark of its ancient
progenitor, iii. 35 Buffalo, of the varieties of the cow kind, but two are
really distinct, the cow and the buffalo -- they bear an antipathy to each
other, iii. 18 -- they do not breed among each other, and no animals are more
distinct and like each other less, iii. 26 -- are in abundance in Guinea and
Malabar, iii. 29 -- it is a great swimmer, iii. 25 -- description of it, iii.
27 -- the veal of the young is not better eating than the beef of the old --
they are natives of the warmer climates, iii. 28 -- yet are bred in several
parts of Europe, particularly in Italy -- the female produces one at a time,
iii. 29 -- continues pregnant for twelve months, iii. 30 -- is afraid of fire
-- leather made of its hide is well known for thickness, softness, and
impenetrability, iii. 27 -- guided by a ring thrust through it nose -- milk of
the female not so good as of the cow -- two buffaloes yoked draw more than four
strong horses -- its flesh hard and blackish, disagreeable to taste and smell
-- this animal wild in many parts of India, and dangerous iii. 28 -- manner of
hunting them, iii. 29 -- when tamed, no animal more patient or humble --
inferior in size only to the elephant, the rhinoceros, or hippopotamos, iii. 28
-- the camelopard, or camel, if taller, neither so long, nor so corpulent -- is
fond of the water, and crosses the largest rivers without difficulty, iii. 29
-- has an aversion to red colors that resemble flame -- in those countries
where they are in plenty no person dresses in scarlet -- they make most use of
their feet in combat, and rather tread their enemies to death than gore them,
iii. 29, 30. Buffon, (M.) his theory of the earth, and a detail of 33 to 38 --
questions that might be asked this most ingenious philosopher concerning his
theory of the earth -- he has brought together a multitude of facts relative to
the history of the earth, i. 39 -- his system about the rudiments of animals,
ii. 19 -- objections against it, ii. 20 -- thinks that women never become bald,
ii. 86 -- his description of the first sensations of a man just brought into
existence, pointing out the steps by which he arrived at reality, ii. 187, 188.
Buffoon-bird, name our sailors give the Numidian crane, v. 390 -- its peculiar
gestures and contortions, v. 391 -- the French call it demoiselle, v. 390 -- it
is a very scarce bird -- the ancients have described a buffoon-bird, but not
meant the Numidian crane, v. 391 Bug, the May bug. See Beetles. Bugs, their
habits, vii. 281 -- described, vii. 282 -- are often found coupling tail to
tail, vii. 284 -- manner of destroying them -- they destroy fleas, and devour
each other, vii. 285 Bulbous, hair is so at the root, ii. 87 Bulin, a
sea-snail, performs the offices of male and female at the same time, vii. 31
Bull, the gimero, asserted to be between the ass and the bull, ii. 386
Bullfinch, bird of the sparrow kind, v. 315, 317 -- may be taught to whistle a
regular tune, v. 345 Bull-head, description of this fish, vi. 309 Bulls, the
wild, in Spain mean despicable animals -- have nothing of that sternness of
aspect remarkable in our bulls, iii. 20 Bull's-eye, name given by sailors to a
terrible hurricane -- described, i. 359 Bunting, bird of the sparrow kind, v.
315 Burnet, his theory of the earth -- a detail of that work, i. 22, 23
Bustard, the largest land-bird that is a native of Britain, v. 194 -- inhabits
the open and extensive plain -- is much larger than the turkey, the male
generally weighing from twenty-five to twenty-seven pounds -- its description
-- its food -- places where frequently seen in flocks of fifty or more, v. 195
-- they have always sentinels placed at proper eminences, ever on the watch, to
warn the flock of the appearance of danger, v. 196 Bustards are often run down
by greyhounds -- in what manner -- seldom wander above twenty or thirty miles
from home, v. 196 -- the males have a pouch, holding near seven quarts of water
-- they change their mates at the season of incubation, about the latter end of
summer -- separate in pairs, if there be a sufficiency of females for the
males; otherwise the males fight until one of them falls -- in France, some of
those victims of gallantry found dead in the fields -- their nests -- they lay
two eggs, almost of the size of a goose-egg -- hatch for about five weeks --
the young run about as soon as out of the shell, v. 197 -- they assemble in
flocks in October, and keep together till April -- their food in winter -- in
parts of Swisserland, they are found frozen in the fields in severe weather --
when taken to a warm place, they again recover -- usually live fifteen years,
and are incapable of being propagated in a domestic state, v. 198 Butcher-bird,
its description, with its habits. v. 132 -- leads a life of continual combat --
intrepidity of this little creature, in going to war with the pie, the crow,
and the kestril, all above four times bigger than itself -- it fights upon the
defensive, and often comes to the attack with advantage, particularly when the
male and female unite to protect their young, and to drive away the more
powerful birds of rapine -- in what manner they sally forth against them, v.
133 -- sometimes the combat ends with the destruction of the assailant, and
also of the defender, v. 134- the most redoubtable birds of prey respect them,
and they fly in their company without fearing their power or avoiding their
resentment -- small birds are its usual food; and when it has killed the bird
or insect, as asserted by the best authority, it fixes them upon some
neighboring thorn, and when thus spitted, pulls them to pieces with its bill,
v. 134 -- the smaller red butcher-bird migrates -- the places where they are to
be found, v. 135, 136 -- their nests, and the number of their eggs -- the
female feeds her young with caterpillars and other insects, but soon after
accustoms them to flesh procured by the male with great industry -- their
nature very different from other birds of prey in their parental care; for,
instead of driving out their young from the nest to shift for themselves, they
keep them with care, and even when adult do not forsake them -- the whole brood
thus live in a family together -- each family afterward live apart, and hunt
in concert -- upon the returning season of courtship, this union is at an end,
the family parts for ever, each to establish a little household of his own, v.
135 -- the manner of flying is always up and down, seldom direct or sideways --
different kinds of this bird, v. 136 Butter, the fat of the manati serves in
all cases instead of butter, iv. 186 Butterfly, one of the principal ornaments
of oriental poetry -- in those countries, the insect is larger and more
beautiful than with us, viii. 4 -- Mr. Reaumur found, that, laying the aurelia
in a warm room, he hastened the disclosure of the butterfly, and keeping it in
an ice-house, he delayed it, viii. 26 -- the efforts which it makes to get free
from its aurelia state, are not so violent as those had in changing from the
caterpillar into the aurelia, viii. 27 -- how the butterfly gets rid of the
aurelia, viii. 28 -- easily distinguished from flies of every other kind by
their wings -- Linnaeus has reckoned up above seven hundred and sixty different
kinds, yet the catalogue is incomplete, viii. 32 -- number and beautiful
colors of its wings, viii. 33 -- butterflies can discover their mates at more
than a mile's distance, viii. 34 -- description of the head, corselet, and
body, viii. 35 -- the eyes have not all the same form; but the outward coat has
a luster, in which may be discovered all the colors of the rainbow -- when
examined closely, it has the appearance of a multiplying glass, viii. 36 -- the
use of their horns or feelers as yet unknown, viii. 37 -- use of their trunks
-- difference between butterflies and moths, viii. 38 -- they often perceive
the approach of the female at above two miles distance; by what sense is not
easy to conceive -- it has no organs for smelling -- the female is larger than
the male, viii. 39 -- if disturbed while united, the female flies off with the
male on her back, entirely passive upon the occasion -- after junction, they
deposite their eggs and die -- all females of this tribe are impregnated by the
male by one aperture, and lay their eggs by another, viii. 40 -- every
butterfly chooses for her brood, instead of the plant most grateful in its
winged state, that it has fed upon in its reptile form -- how they keep their
eggs warm, and also entirely concealed, viii. 41 -- many do not lay till the
winter warns them of their approaching end; some continue the whole winter in
hollows of trees, and do not provide for posterity until the beginning of
April, then leave their retreats, deposite their eggs, and die, viii. 42 --
some kinds actually live upon nothing, ii. 125 Buttock, in man, different from
that of all other animals, ii. 105 Buzzard, a sluggish inactive bird, often
remains perched whole days upon the same bough -- lives more upon frogs, mice,
and insects, than upon birds more troublesome to seize -- its manner of living
in summer -- so little capable of instruction, that it is a proverb to call one
obstinately ignorant, a buzzard -- the honey-buzzard, the moor-buzzard, and the
hen-harrier, are of this stupid tribe, and differ chiefly in their size, v. 130
Byron (Commodore) our last voyager that has seen the gigantic race of mankind,
ii. 261
C.
Cabiai, the same animal as the capibara, iii. 189 Cachalot, a fish said to
pursue a shoal of herrings, and to swallow thousands at a gulp, vi. 168 -- it
has generally gone under the name of the spermaceti whale, till Mr. Penant made
the distinction, borrowing its name from the French -- seven distinctions in
this tribe -- description, vi. 217 -- the throat of this animal very formidable
-- with ease it could swallow an ox -- it can at one gulp send a shoal of
fishes down its enormous gullet -- it terrifies the dolphins and porpoises so
much, as often to drive them on shore -- it contains two precious drugs,
spermaceti and ambergrease, vi. 218 -- the oil of this fish is easily
convertible into spermaceti, by boiling it with a ley of pot-ash, and hardening
it in the manner of soap -- candles are now made of it, vi. 220 -- the balls of
ambergrease not found in all fishes of this kind, but chiefly in the oldest and
strongest, vi. 221 Cagui, or the saki, is the largest monkey of the sagoin kind
-- its description, iv. 237 Cajeta, a mountain near it, was split by an
earthquake, i. 157 Cairo, in what manner they produce there six or seven
thousand chickens at a time, v. 168 Calabria and Sicily first taught the other
kingdoms of Europe the manufacture of silk, viii. 50 Calao, the horned Indian
raven, v. 235 Calcination, all animal substances when calcined are the same,
vii. 3 Calculations made by Kircher in taking the heights of places are
incredible; and why, i. 154 Calf, name given to the young of the hind, or the
female of the stag, iii. 108 Calf, or hind-calf; the stag called so the first
year, iii. 113 Callitrix, the green monkey of St. Jago, of the ancient
continent -- its description, iv. 234 Callyonymus, the dragonet -- description
of this fish, vi. 306 Calms attended with deluges of rain -- why, and where, i.
345 Camel a ruminating animal, iii. 5 -- camel and dromedary not two distinct
kinds, only a variety of the same, which has subsisted time immemorial -- the
only sensible difference between those two races, they produce with each other,
and the mixed breed is considered the best -- of the two the dromedary is far
the most numerous -- countries where the camel and dromedary are found, iv. 302
-- neither can subsist, or propagate, in the climates toward the North --
Arabia the most adapted to the support and production of this animal -- the
camel the most temperate of all animals -- it can continue to travel several
days without drinking, and is often six or seven days without any sustenance --
its feet formed to travel upon sand, and utterly unfit for moist or marshy
places, iv. 303 -- many vain efforts tried to propagate the camel in Spain --
they have been transported into America, but have multiplied in neither -- they
might perhaps produce in these countries, but would in a few years degenerate;
their strength and their patience would forsake them; and instead of enriching,
become a burden to their keepers, iv. 304 -- uses to which this animal is put
among the Arabians, iv. 304, 305 -- its education, iv. 306 -- it has a fifth
stomach, as a reservoir, to hold a greater quantity of water than immediately
wanted -- when the camel finds itself pressed with thirst, it throws up a
quantity of this water by a simple contraction of the muscles, into the other
stomachs -- travelers, when straightened for water, have often killed their
camels for what they expected to find within them -- countries where commerce
is carried on by means of camels iv. 307 -- trading journies in caravans --
their food iv. 308 -- pursue their way when the guides are utterly astray --
its patience and docility when loaded, iv. 309 -- in what manner the female
receives the male -- one male left to wait on ten females, the rest castrated
-- they live from forty to fifty years, iv. 310 -- every part of this animal
converted to some useful purpose -- its very excrements are not useless, iv.
311 -- their burden, iv. 308 Camel, the lama considered as the camel of the
new world, iv. 312 Cameleon, its dimensions and appetites, vii. 151 -- has a
power of driving the air it breathes over every part of the body. vii. 152 --
changes of its color, vii. 153 -- it is an error that it assumes the color of
the object it approaches, vii. 154 -- description of it by Le Bruyn -- it often
moves one eye, when the other is at rest -- sometimes one eye seems to look
directly forward, while the other looks backward; and one looks upward, while
the other regards the earth, vii. 154, 155, 156 Camelopard described, iv. 298
-- dimensions of a young one, iv. 299 -- inhabits the deserts of Africa, iv.
298 -- no animal from its disposition, or its formation, less fitted for a
state of natural hostility, iv. 299, 300 -- it lives entirely upon vegetables,
and when grazing, spreads its fore legs wide to reach the pasture -- known to
the ancients, but rarely seen in Europe -- often seen tame at Grand Cairo, in
Egypt -- Pompey exhibited at one time ten upon the theater, iv. 300 Camerarius,
his description of the perfections a horse ought to possess, ii. 372 Camlet
made of the hair of animals about Angora, iii. 58 Canada, above thirty thousand
martins skins annually imported from that country into England, iii. 372 Canals
for the circulation of blood through the bones, are of different capacities,
during the different stages of life, ii. 194, 195 -- canal of communication
through which the blood circulates in the foetus, without going through the
lungs, found open in some bodies when dissected, vii. 58 Canary-bird, by the
name, originally from the Canary Islands -- come to us from Germany, where they
are bred in numbers -- at what period brought into Europe is not known -- about
a century ago they were sold at very high prices, and kept only for the
amusement of the great -- in its native islands it is of a dusky gray color,
and so different from those seen in Europe, as to raise a doubt about its
species, v. 339 -- rules and instructions for breeding them in a domestic
state, v. 340, 341 -- apparatus for breeding it in Germany, v. 342 -- food the
old ones must be supplied with, when the young ones are excluded -- so prolific
are these birds sometimes, that the female will be ready to hatch a second
brood before the first is able to quit the nest, v. 343 -- this bird kept in
company with the linnet or gold-finch, pairs and produces a mixed breed, most
like the canary-bird, and resembling it in its song, v. 344 -- taught to pick
up the letters of the alphabet at the word of command, to spell any person's
name in company, v. 41 Canary boar described, iii. 196 Cancerous breasts cured
by the sucking of the rubeth, or the land-toad, vii. 102 Candle quickly
extinguishes in an exhausted receiver, and why, i. 333 Cannons filled with
water, and left to freeze, burst, i. 179 Cantharis, well known in the shops by
the name of Spanish flies, and for their use in blisters -- their description,
with the differences from each other, viii. 141 -- the countries where, and
trees on which they are seen -- it is reported, that the country people expect
the return of these insects every seven years -- their bad smell is a guide for
those who catch them -- they smell so disagreeable, as to be perceived at a
great distance, especially about sunset, though not seen at that time, viii.
142 -- they yield a deal of volatile caustic salt -- their qualities -- the
effects fall principally upon the urinary passages -- in what manner they are
killed, viii. 143 Cape de Verde islands -- a south wind prevails in them during
the month of July, i. 346 Cape of Good Hope, a north-west wind blows there
during the month of September, i. 346 -- at the Cape of Good Hope it is
customary to hunt the elephant for its teeth, iv. 280 -- in what manner --
account of an unhappy huntsman, iv. 281 Capibara, or cabial, an animal
resembling an hog of about two years old, iii. 190 -- its description -- some
naturalists have called it the water-hog; and why, iii. 191 -- a native of
South America, and chiefly frequenting the borders of lakes and rivers -- like
the otter it seizes the fish, upon which it preys, with its hoofs and teeth --
lives also upon fruits, corn, and sugarcanes -- its cry resembles the braying
of an ass, more than the grunting of an hog -- its only place of safety is the
water, into which it plunges, when pursued; and keeps so long at the bottom,
that the hunter can have no no hopes of taking it there, iii. 192 -- when young
is easily tamed -- its flesh has a fishy taste, but its head is said to be
excellent, iii. 192 Capons taught to clutch a fresh brood of chickens
throughout the year, v. 169 Capon of Pharaoh supposed the true ibis -- is a
devourer of serpents, and follows the caravans that go to Mecca, to feed upon
the offal of the animals killed on the journey, v. 385 Caracal, or the siagush,
a native of the East Indies, resembles the lynx in size, iii. 258 Caracol, a
town situated at the foot of the Andes, i. 147 Caraguata, a plant in the West
Indies, which clings round the tree it happens to be near -- it keeps away that
nourishment designed to feed the trunk, and at last entirely destroys its
supporter, ii. 4 Carapo, description of this fish, vi. 311 Carassa, a volcano
in South America, i. 99 Caravan, a single lion of the desert often attacks an
entire caravan, iii. 216 -- the assemblage called a caravan sometimes composed
of numbers amounting to ten thousand, iv. 308 Carcajou, name given by the North
Americans to the glutton -- its manner of killing the reindeer, iii. 170
Caribou, name the Americans give the reindeer, iii. 153 Carli (Father) his
account of the faithful services of monkies in Angola, where he went to convert
the savage natives to Christianity, iv. 231 Carnivorous animals seek their food
in gloomy solitude, iii. 1 -- they are sharper than the ruminating animals, and
why -- their stomachs small, and their intestines short, iii. 2 -- their
intestines thin and lean, iii. 4 -- except the dog, none will make a voluntary
attack, but with the odds on their side, ii. 319 -- in proportion as each wants
strength, it uses the assistance of patience, assiduity, and cunning, ii. 320
-- there is one class that pursue in a pack, and encourage each other by their
mutual cries, ii. 322 -- support a state of famine for several weeks together,
ii. 323 -- milk in those animals is more sparing than in others, iii. 337.
Carnivorous birds seek for such as are of the size most approaching their own,
v. 81. See Birds. Carp, an experiment made with this fish in a large vase of
water, under an air-pump, vi. 169, 171 -- one found by Buffon not less than a
hundred years old -- this discovery confirmed by other authors, vi. 176 --
continues in the egg not above three weeks, vi. 180 -- Mr. Tull famous for his
invention of spaying carp to give it a fine flavor, vi. 182 -- its
description, vi. 314 -- the method of fattening it in a damp cellar -- it has
been known thus to live for a fortnight to grow exceedingly fat, and to get a
superior flavor, vi. 320 Carriers, pigeons used to carry letters, v. 292
Carrion-crow resembles the raven in its appetites, its laying, and manner of
bringing up its young, v. 230 Cartesius, his theory to explain the invariable
motion of the winds, not quite so absurd as that of doctor Lyster, i. 342
Carthagena, in America -- the heat of its climate affects the speech of its
inhabitants, which is soft and slow, and their words generally broken -- more
than three parts of our army destroyed by the climate, in our unsuccessful
attack upon it, i. 322 Carthamus, or bastard saffron, strongly purgative to
man, v. 281 -- parrots very fond of it, v. 280 Cartilage, the thyroid
cartilage, ii. 102 -- cartilages in youth elastic, and pliant in age, become at
last hard and bony; and why, ii. 195 Cartilaginous fishes -- their general
conformation -- supposed they grow larger every day till they die, vi. 231 --
their internal structure -- are possessed of a twofold power of breathing --
apertures by which they breathe, vi. 232 -- the cartilaginous shark, or ray,
live some hours after they are taken -- fishes of this tribe can remain under
water, without taking breath; and can venture their heads above the deep, and
continue for hours out of their native element, vi. 233 -- their season and
manner of copulating -- and of bringing forth, vi. 234 -- little difference
between the viviparous, and the oviparous kinds, in this class of fishes, vi.
235 -- five divisions of the cartilaginous fish, vi. 235, 236, 237 Cassowary, a
bird first brought into Europe by the Dutch from Java, in the East Indies,
where only it is found -- its description, v. 68, 69 -- the part which most
distinguishes this animal is the head, which inspires some degree of terror, v.
70 -- its internal parts described -- it has the head of a warrior, the eye of
a lion, the defense of a porcupine, and the swiftness of a courser, v. 72 -- is
not fierce in its natural character -- how it defends itself -- extraordinary
manner of going -- the Dutch assert that it can devour glass, iron, and stones,
and even live and burning coals, without the smallest fear, or the least
injury, v. 73 -- the largest of its eggs is fifteen inches round one way, and
twelve the other -- places where this animal is found -- it has not multiplied
in any considerable degree, as a king of Java made a present of one to the
captain of a Dutch ship, as a rarity, v. 74 Catacombs of Egypt, ii. 277
Catamountain, or the Ocelot of Mr. Buffon, iii. 255 -- its description, iii.
256 -- it hunts for the hare, or the rabbit, ii. 320 -- is one of the fiercest,
and for its size, one of the most destructive animals in the world, iii. 262
Cats, the wild hunt for the squirrel or the mouse, ii. 320 Catanea, a city
utterly overthrown by an earthquake, i. 111, 112 Cataphractus, or kabassou, is
one of the largest kinds of the armadilla, iv. 133 Cataracts of the Rhine, and
of the Nile, i. 221 -- the cataract of the river Velino, in Italy, is above an
hundred and fifty feet perpendicular -- a cataract near the city of Gottenburg
in Sweden -- other cataracts, i. 222, 223 Cataract of the eye, Mr. Cheselden
having couched a boy of thirteen, who to that time had been blind, and at once
having restored him to sight, curiously marked the progress of his mind upon
the occasion, ii. 152, 153 Caterpillars, their differences from all other
insects, viii. 4, et seq. -- all these animals are hatched from the eggs of
butterflies -- during winter, the greatest number of caterpillars are in an egg
state, viii. 7 -- in the aurelia state, they are seemingly deprived of life and
motion, viii. 8 -- some do not make any change at the approach of winter, but
choose themselves some retreat, and there remain quite motionless, and as
insensible as if actually dead -- caterpillars of this kind are found in great
numbers together, enclosed in one common web that covers them all -- there are
some of the kind, whose butterflies live all the winter; and where, viii. 9 --
a single caterpillar eats double its own weight of leaves in a day, and seems
no way disordered by the meal, viii. 10 -- the body of the caterpillar
anatomically considered, viii. 11 -- avidity with which they feed, viii. 12 --
number of their stigmata, or those holes through which the animal is supposed
to breathe, viii. 13 -- it has eighteen lungs -- the experiment of Malphigi to
ascertain their use, viii. 14 -- all caterpillars spin at one time or another,
viii. 15 -- many of them change their skins five or six times in a season,
viii. 16 -- and in what manner, viii. 17 -- change into an aurelia, viii. 19 --
their retreats in that state, viii. 22, 23 -- there are thousands of fishes,
birds, and insects, that live chiefly upon caterpillars, viii. 43 -- a single
sparrow and its mate, that have young ones, destroy above three thousand
caterpillars in a week -- some of the kind, fitted only to live upon leaves and
plants, will eat each other, in preference to their vegetable food, viii. 44 --
the bodies of the larger kinds serve as a nest to various flies, that very
carefully deposite their eggs in them, viii. 46 -- number of worms remain
within the body of the caterpillar, devouring its entrails, without destroying
its life, viii. 47 -- the inchneumon tribe is not the caterpillar's offspring,
as supposed, but its murderers, viii. 48 Cat-fish, its description, vi. 308
Cats, the whole tribe seek their food alone, and never unite for mutual
defense, nor for mutual support -- and, except at certain seasons, are enemies
to each other -- all of the cat kind devour nothing but flesh, and starve upon
any other provision, iii. 198 -- their greatest force lies in the claws, iii.
200 -- the cat goes with young fifty-six days; and seldom brings forth above
five or six at a time -- the male often devours the kittens -- before they are
a year old, they are fit to engender, iii. 203 -- the female seeks the male
with cries; nor is their copulation performed without great pain; and why --
cats hunt the serpents in the isle of Cyprus -- any animal weaker than
themselves, is to them an indiscriminate object of destruction -- the mouse is
their favorite game, and they patiently watch a whole day, until the mouse
appears, iii. 204, 205 -- a flagrant mark by which the cat discovers its
natural malignity -- their eyes see better in darkness than light; and why --
if the inhabitant quits the house, the cat still remains, iii. 205, 206 -- is
excessively fond of some plants, such as valerian, marum, and cat-mint --
particularly loves fish, iii. 206, 207 -- its sleep is very light -- its hair
sends forth shining sparks, if rubbed in the dark -- the wild breed with the
tame -- description of the wild cat, iii. 207, 208 -- inhabits the most
mountainous and woody parts, lives mostly in trees, and feeds only by night --
the cat was much higher in esteem among our ancestors than it is at present,
iii. 208 -- laws of Howel, concerning the price of cats -- cats were not
naturally bred in our forests -- of all quadrupeds, the wild cat is, perhaps,
that whose intestines are proportionably the smallest and the shortest; and
why, iii. 208, 209 -- common to the new continent, as well as the old -- the
blue-cat, iii. 211 -- the lion cat, or more properly, the cat of Angora -- the
cats in Syria and Persia remarkable for their long, soft hair, iii. 212 -- all
the cat kind are kept off by the fires which the inhabitants light to preserve
their herds and flocks -- and they hunt rather by the sight than the smell,
iii. 222 -- it happens that the lion pursues the jackall or the wild dog, while
they are hunting upon the scent, and merely for themselves; the lion is then an
unwelcome intruder upon the fruits of their toil -- from thence, probably, has
arisen the story of the lion's provider, iii. 223 -- the lion devours a great
deal at a time, and generally fills himself for two or three days to come -- in
the deserts and forests, his most usual prey are the gazelles, and the monkeys,
iii. 223, 224 -- the race of cats noxious in proportion to their power to do
mischief -- inhabit the most torrid latitudes of India, Africa, and America,
and have never been able to multiply beyond the torrid zone; they seldom attack
man, though provoked -- of all animals these are the most sullen, and, to a
proverb, untameable, iii. 259 -- different classes of the kind from the lion to
the cat, iii. 267, 268 -- the wild cat and the match seldom meet without a
combat -- it is not a match for the martin, iii. 369 -- the cat of Pharaoh
injudiciously called the ichneumon, iii. 376 -- cats of Constantinople, a name
of the gennet, and why, iii. 388 Cattle, we have the best breed of horned
cattle in Europe, iii. 12 -- the large hornless bred in some parts of England,
originally from Poland, iii. 13 -- the Dutch bring great quantities of lean
cattle from Denmark, to fatten on their own rich grounds -- that of Ukraine
becomes fat, and is considered the largest breed of all Europe -- in
Switzerland these animals grow to a large size -- not so in France, iii. 19 --
size in Barbary, Ethiopia, Persia, and Tartary, iii. 20 -- leather-mouthed
cattle, iii. 45 -- liable to be destroyed by the South-American bat, vampyre,
iv. 146 Caverns, the amazing cavern of Eldenhole in Derbyshire, i. 60 -- the
dreadful cavern in the country of the Arrian Indians, called the Gulf of
Pluto, described by Aelian, i. 61 -- cavern of Maestricht, i. 63 -- its
description, i. 64 -- no part of the world has a greater number of artificial
caverns than Spain, i. 64 -- in general deserted by every race of meaner
animals, except the bat -- the caverns called Oakey-hole, the Devil's-hole, and
Penpark-hole in England, i. 65 -- the cavern of Antiparos, and its discovery,
i. 67 -- how natural caverns formed, i. 72 -- two hundred feet as much as the
lowest of them is found to sink, i. 73 -- one in Africa, near Fez, continually
sends forth either smoke or flames, i. 99 Caviar, the inhabitants of Norway
prepare from eggs found in the body of the porpess, a savoury liquor, which
makes a delicate sauce, and is good when eaten with bread, vi. 228 -- it is
made with the roe of sturgeon -- more in request in other countries of Europe
than with us -- and is a considerable merchandise among the Turks, Greeks, and
Venetians -- manner of making it, vi. 281, 282 Causes, the investigation of
final causes a barren study; and, like a virgin dedicated to the deity, brings
forth nothing, i. 20 Caustic, cantharides yield a great deal of volatile
caustic salt, viii. 143 Cayman, a sort of crocodile, vii. 119 Cayopolin, a kind
of oppossum -- its description, iv. 248 Cea, an island washed away with several
thousand inhabitants, i. 134 Cells made by the bees, viii. 70, 71 Cenere, a
mount of recent appearance, i. 162 Sentinel, some animals carefully avoid their
enemies, by placing sentries to warn of danger, and know how to punish such as
neglect their post, or are unmindful of the common safety, ii. 324 -- when the
marmouts venture abroad, one is placed as a sentry, upon a lofty rock, iv. 43
-- the bustards have sentinels placed upon proper eminences, where always on
the watch, they warn the flock of the smallest appearance of danger, v. 196
Centipes, the scolopendra, vii. 302 Centriscus, a kind of cartilaginous fish,
vi. 291 Cephus, name given by the ancients to the monkey now called mona, iv.
234 Cepola, the description of this fish, vi. 307 Cerigo, an island of the
Archipelago, where many wild asses are found, ii. 377 Cetaceous fishes, the
whale and its varieties resemble quadrupeds in their internal structure, and in
some of their appetites and affections, vi. 185 -- they are constrained every
two or three minutes to come up to the surface to take breath, as well as to
spout out through their nostril, for they have but one, that water which they
sucked in while gaping for their prey, vi. 186 -- the senses of these animals
superior to those of other fishes, and it is most likely that all animals of
the kind can hear, vi. 187 -- they never produce above one young, or two at the
most; and this the female suckles in the manner of quadrupeds, her breasts
being placed, as in the human kind, above the navel -- distinctive marks of
this tribe, vi. 188, 189, 190 Chase, men of every age and nation have made that
of the stag a favorite pursuit -- in our country it was ever esteemed a
principal diversion of the great, iii. 109 -- the same in Sicily, iii. 120 --
and in China, iii. 121 -- terms used by hunters in that chase, iii. 113, 114 --
chase of the fox -- cant terms used by the huntsmen in it, iii. 328 -- these
sports reserved by sovereigns for particular amusement, and when, iii. 109 --
in the reigns of William Rufus and Henry the First, it was less criminal to
destroy a human being than a beast of chase -- sacred edifices thrown down for
room to beasts of chase, iii. 110 -- chase of the stag, as performed in
England, iii. 112, 116 -- of all varieties, that of the ostrich the most
laborious, is also the most entertaining -- description of it, v. 59, 60
Chacrelas, white men go by that name in the East Indies, ii. 241 Chaetodon, or
the cat-fish, its description, vi. 308 Chaffinch, a bird of the sparrow kind,
v. 315, 317, 318 -- time of emigration of the hen, v. 32 Chapotonadas, a
distemper in America, i. 323 Charles XII. when shot at the siege of
Frederickshall, was seen to clap his hand on the hilt of his sword, ii. 208
Charossi, the only sort of horses for hunting lions, iii. 226 Charybdis, a
gulf, Nicola Pesce jumped into it, continued for three quarters of an hour
below, and at last appeared holding a golden cup in one hand, and making his
way among the waves with the other, i. 296 -- description of this gulf, i. 297
Chasms, amazing in the Alps, i. 59 -- and still more in the Andes, i. 60 --
causes that produce chasms or fissures, i. 62 Chatterer, a bird native of
Germany -- its description, v. 242 Cheese, the inhabitants of Canada use no
other than the milk of the hind, or the female of the stag, iii. 124 -- those
of Lapland little and well tasted, iii. 165 -- never breed mites, iii. 166
Cheops, the oldest measure of the human figure in his monument, in the first
pyramid of Egypt, ii. 264 Cheselden, after couching a boy of thirteen for a
cataract, blind from his infancy, and at once restoring him to sight, curiously
marked the progress of his mind upon the occasion, ii. 152 to 156 Chevrotin, or
little Guinea deer, the least of all cloven footed quadrupeds, and perhaps the
most beautiful -- is most delicately shaped -- its description -- native of
India, Guinea, and the warm climates between the tropics, iii. 82 -- the male
in Guinea has horns; but the female is without any -- they chiefly abound in
Java and Ceylon, iii. 83 Cheyne, suspected the quantity of water on the earth
daily decreasing, i. 182 Chicken, an amazing history of it in the egg, by
Malpighi and Haller, ii. 30, et seq. -- in what manner six or seven thousand
are produced at a time, at Grand Cairo, v. 168 -- capons clutch a fresh brood
of chickens throughout the year, v. 169 Child, history of the child in the
womb, ii. 39 to 47 -- as the child increases in age, the inferior parts
proportionably lengthen, ii. 108 -- a child marked with a scar, similar to one
the father had received in battle, ii. 238 -- Sir Thomas Brown hoped to become
able to produce children by the same method as trees, ii. 26 -- children of
negroes able to walk at two months old; at least to move from one place to
another -- skin of children newly brought forth, is always red, and why -- the
size of a newborn infant about twenty inches, and its weight twelve pounds,
ii. 56 -- in cold countries continue to be suckled for four or five years
together, ii. 59 -- child's growth less every year, till the time of puberty
when it seems to start up of a sudden, ii. 61 -- in some countries speak sooner
than in others, and why, ii. 64 -- children of the Italians speak sooner than
those of the Germans -- various methods pointed out to improve the intellects
of children, ii. 64, et seq. -- white children frequently produced from black
parents; but never black children from two whites, ii. 240 -- inherit the
accidental deformities of their parents -- instances of it, ii. 238 -- many
instances of the child in the womb being marked by the strong affections of the
mother -- how performed is not known, ii. 249 -- hard to conceive that the
child, in the womb, should take the print of the father's features, ii. 248
Chimborazo, a remarkable mountain in South America, i. 151 Chinese, have
neither flats nor sharps in their music, ii. 166 -- their horses weak, little,
ill shaped, and cowardly, ii. 364 -- description of that people, ii. 221
Chorosan, in Persia, bodies previously embalmed and buried in the sands of that
country, preserved from corruption for a thousand years, ii. 277 Chough,
description of the Cornish chough, v. 231 St. Christopher, Dr. Grainger, who
resided for many years there, affirmed, that of the same kind of fish caught at
one end of the island, some were the best and most wholesome in the world;
while others taken at a different end, were dangerous, and commonly fatal, vi.
349 Chrysalis, or the aurelia, viii. 19 Chryses, an island sunk near Lemnos, i.
134 Cicero, a long poem of his in praise of the halcyon, of which but two lines
remain, vi. 144 Circassians, described, ii. 230 Circe, an enchantress, armed
her son with a spear headed with the spine of the trygon, vi. 260 Circulation
of the blood through the bones, first accidentally discovered by Mr. Belcher --
experiment made by him for this purpose -- canals for circulation of the blood
through the bones of different capacities, in the various stages of life, ii.
194 -- circulation through all parts of the body, ii. 195 Civet, the species
distinguished into two kinds; Mr. Buffon calls one the civet, the other the
zibet -- distinction between the two kinds -- the civet thirty inches long --
both civet and zibet considered as varieties of the same animal, as former
naturalists have done, iii. 389 -- the civet resembles the weasel kind, in what
-- differs from them, in what -- the opening of the pouch or bag, the
receptacle of the civet, iii. 389, 390 -- manner of taking the civet from the
pouch -- although a native of warmest climates, this animal lives in temperate,
and even cold countries, iii. 391 -- kinds of food it likes best -- drinks
rarely, yet makes urine often; and, upon such occasions, the male is not
distinguishable from the female -- numbers of these animals bred in Holland,
and the perfume of Amsterdam reckoned the purest of any -- the quantity greater
proportionably to the quality and abundance of the food -- this perfume so
strong that it communicates to all parts of the animal's body, iii 392 -- to
its fur and skin -- manner of choosing the perfume -- the places of
considerable traffic in it -- the animal irritated, its scent becomes greater;
and tormented, its sweat, is still stronger, and serves to adulterate or
increase what otherwise obtained from it -- civet a more grateful perfume than
musk -- sold in Holland for fifty shillings an ounce, iii. 393 -- its eyes
shine in the night -- sees better in the dark than by day -- breeds very fast
in climates where heat conduces to propagation -- thought a wild fierce animal,
never thoroughly familiar -- lives by prey, birds and animals, it can overcome
-- its claws feeble and inflexible -- this perfume quite discontinued in
prescription, iii. 394 Clavicles, or collar bones, what animals have them --
Mr. Buffon says, none but monkeys, this an oversight, ii. 102 Claws of the lion
give a false idea of its power; we ascribe to its force the effects of its
arms, ii. 111 -- the weasel kind neither draw in, nor extend their claws, as
cats do, iii. 346 -- those of the civet, feeble and inflexible, iii. 394
Climates, calamities in those where air is condensed by cold, i. 325 -- cause
obvious and sufficient to produce blackness of negroes, ii. 234 -- complexions
of different countries darken in proportion to the heat of the region, ii. 233,
234 -- next to human influence, the climate has the strongest effects upon the
nature and form of quadrupeds, ii. 328 -- those excessively hot, unfavourable
to horses, ii. 363 -- in general, water fowls of no peculiar climate, vi. 106
Cloth, now made worse than some years past, iii. 44 -- Flemings possessed the
art of cloth-working in a superior degree, iii. 43. Clove-trees, cut down by
the Dutch at Ternate to raise the price of the spice -- soon had reason to
repent of their avarice, i. 325 Clouds, the forerunners of a terrible
hurricane, called by sailors the bull's eye, i. 359 -- dashing against each
other, produce electrical fire -- water evaporates, and rising forms clouds, i.
368 -- theory upon it -- that of Dr. Hamilton, i. 369 -- the author's theory of
evaporation, i. 370 -- at once pour down their contents, and produce a deluge
-- reflecting back images of things on earth, like mirrors, i. 377 Clupea, or
herring, its description, vi. 314 Coaiti, a monkey of the new continent,
described, iv. 236 Coan, the name of a dwarf lately dead at Chelsea, ii. 254
Coast of Italy is bordered with rocks of marble of different kinds -- those of
France from Breast to Bourdeaux, and Spain, composed of rocks, i. 271 -- of the
sea, have peculiar winds, i. 348, et seq. -- deadly winds all along those of
the Persian Gulf, and those of India, i. 359 Coatimondi, extreme length of its
snout -- its description -- very subject to eat its own tail -- its habits, iv.
336, 337 Cobitis, the loach, description of this fish, vi. 314 Cobra di
Capello, a kind of serpent, vii. 192, 201, 216 Cochineal, description of this
insect as in our shops brought from America, viii. 145 -- difference between
the domestic and wild cochineal -- precautions used by those who take care of
these insects, viii. 145, 146 -- the propagator has a new harvest thrice a year
-- various methods of killing them produce different colors as brought to us
-- our cochineal is only the females; used both for dyeing and medicine, viii.
147 Cock, of all birds the cock the oldest companion of man, and first
reclaimed from the forest, v. 158 -- species of cock from Japan, covered over
with hair instead of feathers -- the western world had the cock from Persia --
Aristophanes's cock the Persian bird -- it was one of the forbidden foods among
the ancient Britons -- Persia, that first introduced it to us, no longer knows
it in natural form, v. 161 -- countries where it is wild -- peculiarities, in a
wild condition -- another peculiarity in those of the Indian woods, their
bones, when boiled, are black as ebony, v. 162 -- the Athenians had
cock-matches as we -- no animal of greater courage, when opposed to his own
species -- in China, India, the Philipine islands, and over the East,
cock-fighting the sport and amusement of kings and princes -- cocks in China as
bold, or bolder than ours, v. 163 -- and of more strength with less weight --
its great courage proceeds from being the most fallacious of all birds -- a
single cock suffices for a dozen hens; and is the only animal whose spirits are
not abated by indulgence -- soon grows old; and in three or four years becomes
unfit for purposes of impregnation, v. 164, 165 -- how long cocks live, left to
themselves, not well ascertained -- Aldrovandus makes their age to be ten years
-- are injured, as Linnaeus asserts, by elder-berries, v. 170 -- the black
chiefly found in heathy mountains and piny forests, v. 199 -- cock of the wood,
See Wood-cock. Cockle, a bivalved shellfish, vii. 51 Coco, the elephant eats
the plant to the roots, iv. 259 Cod, from the banks of Newfoundland, pursues
the whiting, which flies before it to the southern shores of Spain, vi. 168 --
spawns in one season, as Lewenhoeck asserts, above nine millions of eggs or
peace, contained in a single roe, vi. 178 -- its description, vi. 312 -- fishery
in Newfoundland, vi. 325 Cold, promotes evaporation, although diminishing the
force of menstruums, i. 370 -- extremity of it not less productive of tawny
complexions than that of heat, ii. 236 -- excessive, preserves bodies from
corruption, ii. 275 -- some fishes rendered so torpid by cold, in northern
rivers, as to be frozen up in the masses of ice, where they continue for months
together, without life or sensation, prisoners of congelation, waiting a warmer
sun to restore them to life and liberty, vi. 347 Collar-bones, what animals
have them, ii. 102 Colliers, eight dropped down dead by the vapor of the mines
in Scotland, as if shot, i. 81 Color, none refreshes the sight so well as
green, i. 15 -- of the sea, not from any thing floating in it, but from
different reflections of rays of light -- the proof, i. 292 -- different colors
of the eye, ii. 82 -- whence proceeds the tawny of North American Indians, ii.
236 -- different of the waters of the same sea, i. 274 -- hair takes its color
from juices flowing through it, ii. 87 -- that of the object contributes to
form an idea of the distance at which it appears, ii. 156 -- of all those by
which mankind is diversified, ours most beautiful to the eye, and most
advantageous, ii. 232 -- those changes the African, the Asiatic, or the
American undergo, in their color, are but accidental deformities, which might
probably be removed, ii. 242 -- nothing exceeds the delicate regularity of
those of the zebra, ii. 390 -- change of color in the hair obtains in some
degree, in all quadrupeds, iii. 354 -- different in several parts of the fur of
the sable, iii. 374 -- of the blood in the arteries or veins, i. 332 Comets,
their number much greater than that of the planets -- they roll in orbits --
experience has not sufficiently confirmed the truth of the investiga- about
their returning periods, i. 5 Complexion, extremity of cold not less productive
of a tawny than that of heat, ii. 236 -- not easy to conceive how the sun
whitens wax and linen, and darken the human complexion, ii. 235 -- the sun not
the only cause of darkening it, ii. 236 Compte's (Le) account of an ape he saw
in the streights of Molucca, iv. 198 Concretions, scarce an animal, or a part
of their bodies, in which concretions are not formed, iii. 77 -- experience has
found but few cures by the efficacy of these concretions; often prove fatal to
the animal that bears them, iii. 76, 77 Condamine, (La) knows a fish possessed
of the powers of the torpedo, and every way resembling a lamprey, vi. 267
Condoma, anomalous animal of the goat kind, iii. 80 -- its description, iii.
80, 81 Condor, possesses in a higher degree than the eagle, all the qualities
that render it formidable to the feathered kind, to beasts, and to man himself
-- is eighteen feet across the wings extended, according to Acosta, Jarcilasso,
and Desmarchais, v. 100 -- the beak so strong as to pierce the body of a cow;
two of them able to devour it -- they do not abstain from man himself --
fortunately there are few of the species -- the Indians believe that they will
carry off a deer, or a young calf in their talons, as eagles would an hare or a
rabbit -- and that their sight is piercing, and their air terrible; that they
seldom frequent the forests, as they require a large space for the display of
their wings -- they come down to the seashore at certain seasons, when their
prey fails upon land, they then feed upon dead fish, and such nutritious
substances as thrown upon the shore -- their countenance not so terrible as old
writers have represented, v. 101 -- those who have seen this animal, say the
body is as large as that of a sheep -- many instances of its carrying away
children, v. 102 -- circumstantial account of this bird by P. Feuillee, the
only traveller who has accurately described it, v. 102 to 104 -- countries
where it is found, v. 105 -- in the deserts of Pachomac, where it is chiefly,
men seldom venture to travel -- its flesh as disagreeable as carrion, v. 102
Conepate, an animal resembling the skink in all things except size, iii. 381
Congar of America, resembles the tiger in natural ferocity, though far inferior
in its dimensions, iv. 331 Congelation, the heat of blood in man and other
animals is about thirty degrees above congelation; but in the marmout and other
animals which seem to sleep the winter, the heat of the blood is not above ten
degrees above congelation, iv. 45 Congo, the land and sea breezes there, i. 351
-- the inhabitants of that country desire ardently to prostitute their wives
and daughters to strangers, for trifling advantages, ii. 74 Constantinople, its
cats -- name given to the genetts, and why, iii. 388 Continent of America --
that part under the line is cool and pleasant, ii. 233 Coot, description of
that bird, vi. 36 -- residence and nest, vi. 38 -- sometimes swims down the
current, till it reaches the sea -- dangers encountered in this voyage, vi. 39
Copel, manner of making that vessel, i. 166 Copulation, natural instinct for
the proper times -- instances of it, ii. 337, 338 -- gnats produce young,
without copulation, viii. 156 Coquallin, the Brasilian squirrel, so called by
Buffon, iv. 26 Coral, the common red never met with in the fossil world, i. 46
Coral-serpent described, vii. 215 Coral-plants, their various appearances,
viii. 193 -- opinion of count Marsigli upon corals -- Mr. Ellis proves it the
work of reptiles of the polypus kind, viii. 194 -- principal experiment to this
purpose, viii. 196 Coralines, called fungi madrepores, viii. 197 Cordyle, the
tockay and the tejuguacu fill up the chasm between the crocodile and the
African iguana, vii. 149 Coret, a sea-snail, performs the offices of male and
female at the same time, vii. 31 Coriander used in dressing a hare in the true
Roman taste, iv. 15 Corin, name of the third variety of gazelles, by Mr.
Buffon, iii. 73 Cormorant, its description and food -- remarkably voracious,
with a sudden digestion, vi. 65 -- its form disagreeable -- its voice hoarse
and croaking -- all its qualities obscene -- no wonder Milton makes Satan
personate this bird -- objection against this passage of Milton's Paradise
Lost, vindicated -- fishes in fresh waters, and in the depths of the ocean, vi.
66 -- builds in cliffs of rocks, and in trees -- preys in the daytime, and by
night -- once used in England for fishing, and in what manner, vi. 67 -- how
educated in China, for the purposes of fishing, vi. 68 -- the best fisher of
all birds, vi. 69 -- sometimes has caught the fish by the tail -- the fins
prevent its being swallowed in that position -- how it manages the fish in this
case, vi. 70 -- remarked for the quickness of its sight, vi. 74 Corn, the
flying squirrel is apt to do a great deal of damage in the cornfieldsd, iv. 37
Cornaro lived an hundred years with a constitution naturally feeble, ii. 200
Cornea of a flea has above six thousand facets, according to Leuwenhoeck --
Puget adapted the cornea of a fly in a position, to see objects through it with
a microscope, and a soldier thus seen, appeared like an army of pigmies -- the
arch of a bridge was a spectacle more magnificent than human skill could
perform -- the flame of a candle seemed a beautiful illumination, viii. 36
Cornwall, pilchards make that coast a place of resort, vi. 332 Coromandel,
dreadful tempests wholly unknown along its coasts, i. 348 -- amazing size of
oysters along that coast, vii. 51 Corrira, or the runner, a bird of the crane
kind -- its description, vi. 21 Corruption, excessive cold preserves bodies
from it -- and a great degree of dryness produced by heat, ii. 275 -- earth, if
drying and astringent, produces the same effect, ii. 276 -- bodies never
corrupt at Spitsbergen, though buried for thirty years, ii. 274 -- men and
animals buried in the sands of Arabia, preserved from corruption for ages, as
if actually embalmed, ii. 275 -- bodies buried in the monastery of the
Cordeliers at Thoulouse, preserved from corruption, ii. 276 -- bodies
previously embalmed buried in the sands of Chorosan, in Persia, preserved from
corruption for a thousand years, ii. 277 -- amazing preservation from it, in a
mummy lately dug up in France, ii. 283 Coryphoena, the razor-fish, its
description, vi. 307 Cotopaxi, volcano in South America, described by Ulloa, i.
99 -- more than three geographical miles above the surface of the sea, i. 151
Cotton-tree, the seed intoxicates parrots, as wine does man, v. 280 Cottus, the
bull-head -- description of this fish, vi. 309 Couando, much less than the
porcupine -- its description, iv. 114 Cougar, the red tiger, by Mr. Buffon,
iii. 244 -- extremely common in South America, iii. 246 -- in what manner the
Indians encounter it, iii. 246, 247 Coulterneb, remarkable bird of the Penguin
kind. See Puffin. Country inhabited before 1666, now deserted -- the sands
which cover it, i. 364 Cows allured by music, ii. 169 -- of ruminant animals,
the cow kind deserves the first rank, iii. 8 -- meanest peasants in Germany,
Poland, and Switzerland, kill one cow at least for their own table -- salted
and hung up, is preserved as a delicacy the year round -- cows want the upper
fore-teeth, iii. 9 -- in no part of Europe cows grow so large, yield more milk,
or more readily fatten than in England -- make no particular distinction in
their herbage, indiscriminately devouring the proper quantity -- it gives back
more than it takes from the soil -- the age of the cow known by the teeth and
horns -- the number of its teeth, iii. 10, 11 -- have eight cutting teeth in
the lower-jaw -- manner of renewing them, iii. 11 -- the horns more surely
determine this animal's age, and how -- while this animal lives, the horns
lengthen, iii. 12 -- wants in udder what it has in neck -- the larger the
dew-lap, the smaller the quantity of its milk -- the kind to be found in every
part of the world -- large in proportion to the richness of the pasture --
Africa remarkable for the largest and smallest cattle of this kind; as also
India, Poland, and Switzerland -- among the Eluth Tartars, the cow so large,
that a tall man only can reach the tip of its shoulder, iii. 14 -- of all
quadrupeds, the cow most liable to alteration from its pasture -- the breed of
the Isle of Man, and most parts of Scotland, much less than in England, also
differently shaped, iii. 13 -- the breed improved by foreign mixture, adapted
to supply the imperfections of our own, iii. 12 -- such as purely British, far
inferior in size to those of the continent, iii. 13 -- the cow, the urus, and
the bison, animals of the same kind -- difference in size not so remarkable as
those in its form, hair, and horns -- many considered as a different kind, and
names given them as a distinct species, when in reality all the same, iii. 15
-- only two varieties of the kind really distinct, the cow and the buffalo --
they bear an antipathy to each other -- scarce a part of the world where the
cow kind is not found, iii. 18 -- variety of the horns -- those in Iceland are
without horns, iii. 19 -- the Barbary cow, or zebu, iii. 23 -- of all animals,
the cow most extensively propagated -- an inhabitant of the frozen fields of
Iceland, and the burning deserts of Lybia, iii. 24 -- other animals preserve
their nature or their form with inflexible perseverance -- the cows suit
themselves to the appetites and conveniences of mankind -- no animal has a
greater variety of kinds, none more humble and pliant, iii. 25 -- the cow and
bison breed among each other -- the cow does not breed with the buffalo -- no
animals more distinct, or have stronger antipathies to each other, iii. 26 --
the cow goes nine months with young, iii. 31 -- the grunting, or Siberian cow,
and the little African, or zebu, are different races of the bison, iii. 32 --
animals of the cow kind, by naturalists extended to eight or ten sorts, reduced
to two -- an animal of the cow kind, no naturalist has described -- the
description of it, iii. 33, 34 -- the Greeks compared the eyes of a beautiful
woman to those of a cow, iii. 72 -- it eats two hundred and seventy-six plants,
and rejects two hundred and eighteen, iii. 176 Cow-bezoar, a factitious sort,
iii. 76 Crab, a ruminating fish, iii. 5 -- surprising manner in which the
monkies draw crabs from the water, iv. 228 -- found in fresh and salt water,
and upon land, -- description -- its intestines have many convolutions, vi.
367, 368 -- land-crabs of various kinds -- some healthful and nourishing --
others poisonous or malignant to a great degree -- places where found, vi. 368
Violet crab of the Caribbee islands described -- their food -- their nippers,
the principal instrument for seizing and cutting their food -- catch such hold,
that the limb is lost sooner than the grasp -- thus it gets off, leaving its
claw fastened upon the enemy -- the claw performs its duty, and keeps a minute
fastened upon the finger, while the crab makes off -- it loses no great matter
by a leg or an arm, as they grow again, the animal becomes perfect as before,
vi. 369 -- fatiguing and amazing march from the mountains to the seashore, to
deposit the spawn, from which, soon after, millions of little crabs are seen
slowly traveling up the mountains, vi. 370, 371 -- wait the benefit of
seawater for their delivery, vi. 372 -- change their shells -- have under
their stomachs four white stones, which gradually decrease, as the shell
hardens, and when come to perfection, are not to be found, vi. 374 -- season,
and manner in which they are caught, vi. 374, 375 -- in Jamaica they are in
great plenty, and considered as one of the greatest delicacies -- many of this
kind found poisonous, vi. 375, 376 Soldier-crab, vi. 376 -- seen every year
descending from the mountains to the seashore, to deposit its spawn, and to
provide itself with a new shell, vi. 377 -- contest between them for some
well-looking favorite shell, for which they are rivals -- strike with their
claws -- beat each other, till the weakest is obliged to yield, and give up the
object of dispute, vi. 378 -- when taken, sends forth a feeble cry,
endeavoring to seize the enemy with its nippers -- not much esteemed for its
flesh, vi. 375 Crane, bred familiarly in our marshes formerly -- not now; and
why, v. 33 -- general characteristics and habits of birds of the crane-kind, v.
366, 367 -- their food and flesh, v. 368 -- description of the crane, v. 371 --
Gesner says, its feathers, in his time, were set in gold, and worn as ornaments
in caps -- description of this bird from ancient writers -- who have mixed
imagination with history -- whence have arisen the fables of supporting their
aged parents, v. 371 -- and fighting with pigmies -- the crane a social bird,
and seldom seen alone -- usual method of flying or sitting, in flocks of fifty
or sixty together; while part feed, the rest keep guard -- subsists mostly upon
vegetables, v. 373 -- are known in every country of Europe, except our own --
are birds of passage -- seasons of their migrations, during which they do
incredible damage, chiefly in the night -- were formerly known, and held in
great estimation here for the delicacy of their flesh -- there was a penalty
upon destroying their eggs, v. 373 -- Plutarch says, cranes were blinded, kept
in coops, and fattened for the tables of the great in Rome; at present, they
are considered all over Europe as wretched eating -- qualities of its flesh, v.
374 -- their note the loudest of all other birds; and often heard in the
clouds, when the bird itself is unseen, v. 375 -- amazing heights to which they
ascend when they fly -- though unseen themselves, they have distinct vision of
every object below, v. 376 -- extraordinary length and contorsion of its
windpipe -- use made of their clangorous sound -- they rise but heavily, are
shy birds, and seldom let the fowler approach them -- their depredations
usually in the darkest nights; when they enter a field of corn, and trample it
down, as if crossed over by a regiment of men, v. 377 -- corn their favorite
food, scarce any other comes amiss to them -- Redi's experiments to this
purpose -- a little falcon pursues, and often disables it, v. 378 -- method
used on such occasions by those fond of hawking -- barbarous custom of breeding
up cranes to be thus baited -- easily tamed -- Albertus Magnus says, it has a
particular affection for man -- the female distinguished from the male, by not
being bald behind -- never lays above two eggs at a time -- the young are soon
fit to fly; and unfledged, they run with such swiftness that a man cannot
easily overtake them, v. 379, 380 -- Aldrovandus assures one was kept tame for
above forty years -- the vulgar bear the crane a compassionate regard --
prejudices in its favor -- a heinous offense in some countries to kill a
crane, v. 380 -- distinctions between the crane and the stork, v. 382 Crane,
the Balearic, from the coast of Africa, and the Cape de Verd islands -- its
description -- habits -- has been described by the name of sea-peacock, v. 387,
388 -- real Balearic crane of Pliny, v. 386 -- foreign birds of the crane kind
described; the jabiru, the jabiru-guacu, v. 388, 389 -- the anhima, v. 389 --
the buffoon bird, or Numidian crane, described, v. 390, 391 -- place where the
crane kind seem to have formed their general rendezvous, vi. 9 -- the flamingo
the most remarkable of all the kind, the tallest, bulkiest, and most beautiful,
vi. 10 -- described, vi. 10, 11 -- small birds of the crane kind, vi. 22, 23
Crantz, history of Greenland, i. 245. See Krantz. Craesus, (king of Lydia)
seated on his throne, with all the barbarous pomp of Eastern splendour, asking
Solon if he had ever beheld any thing so fine? was answered, that after the
beautiful plumage of the pheasant, he could be astonished at no other finery,
v. 184 Cricetus, the German rat, by Mr. Buffon called the hamster, iv. 81 --
Its description -- is the greatest pest in the countries where found, and every
method made use of to destroy it -- its hole a curious object for
contemplation; shows a skill superior to the rest of the rat kind --
description of it -- their storehouses, iv. 82, 83 -- contain two bushels of
good grain in each apartment -- means of finding out their retreats, iv. 83 --
produce young twice or thrice a year, and bring five or six at a time, iv. 84
-- their devastations produce a famine -- they destroy each other -- their fur
very valuable, iv. 84 Cricket, a ruminating insect, or seemingly so, iii. 6 --
difference from the grasshopper, vii. 349 -- their voice, vii. 350 -- food,
vii. 351 -- never drink -- sound of drums and trumpets make them forsake their
situation, vii. 351, 352 Mole-cricket, described, thought to be amphibious,
vii. 352, 353 -- the number of their eggs -- a most detested insect by
gardeners -- its devastations -- precautions of the female against the black
beetle vii. 353 -- their care and assiduity in the preservation of their young,
vii. 354 Croches, in the head of a stag, iii. 114 Crocodile, extraordinary
combat between this animal and the tiger, iii. 247, 248 -- the ichneumon
discovers and destroys its eggs -- kills its young, and sometimes entering the
mouth of the crocodile, when sleeping on the shore, effectually destroys it,
iii. 377 -- the eggs it lays in the sand at a time, often amount to three or
four hundred, iii. 380 -- the places where found, together with their
dimensions, vii. 118, 119 -- description, vii. 120 to 124 -- several examples
of taking a man out of a canoe from his companions, notwithstanding all
opposition and assistance, vii. 125 -- terrible even upon land -- its
depredations, vii. 126 -- combats between the crocodile and the tiger, vii. 127
-- in what manner it seizes its prey, vii. 126, 127 -- how a negroe ventures to
attack this animal in its own element, vii. 128 -- manner of taking it in Siam,
vii. 129 -- often managed like a horse; a curb put into its mouth, and the
rider directs it as he likes -- manner of taking it along the rivers of Africa
-- pools of water where bred as we breed carp in our ponds, vii. 130 -- in
Egypt and other long peopled countries, this animal solitary and fearful, vii.
131 -- in the river San Domingo, they are most inoffensive, children play with
them, and ride about on their backs; beat them without receiving the smallest
injury, vii. 132 -- probable opinion, its musky substance amassed in glands
under the legs and arms -- its flesh -- the eggs to the savages most delicate
morsels -- all breed near fresh waters -- precautions in laying their eggs,
vii. 133, 134 -- the female having introduced her young to their natural
element, she, and the male, become their most formidable enemies, vii. 135 --
the open bellied crocodile, thought viviparous, has a false belly like the
oppossum, for the young to creep out and in as danger or necessity requires --
their age, vii. 137 -- produced to fight at the amphitheatre at Rome, vii. 138
Croppers, a kind of pigeons, v. 293 Crossbill, bird of the sparrow kind, v.
315, 317 Crossed fox, animal between the dog and fox, iii. 341. See Isatis.
Crown, in the head of a stag, iii. 114 Crows fetch and carry with the docility
of a spaniel, v. 222 -- the carrion-crow resembles the raven in appetites,
laying, and manner of bringing up its young -- the Royston crow, v. 230
Cruelty, teaching the arts of cruelty, equivalent to committing them, v. 164
Crustaceous, animals of the lobster kind, vi. 358 Cub, the fox is so called
during the first year, iii. 328 -- born blind, like those of the dog, iii. 331
Cuckoo, fables invented of this bird, now sufficiently refuted, where it
resides in winter, or how provides for its supply during that season, still
undiscoveres -- this bird somewhat less than a pigeon, shaped like a magpie,
and of a greyish color, is distinguished from all other by its round prominent
nostrils -- discovers itself in our country early in the spring, by its well
known call -- its note heard earlier or later as the season is more or less
forward, and the weather inviting -- from the cheerful voice of this bird the
farmer instructed in the real advancement of the year -- history and nature of
this bird still in great obscurity, v. 263 -- its call an invitation to
courtship, used only by the male, generally perched upon a dead tree, or bare
bough, repeating his song, which he loses when the genial season is over -- his
note pleasant, though uniform -- the female makes no nest, v. 264 -- repairs to
the nest of some other bird, generally the water-wag-tail or hedge-sparrow,
and, after devouring the eggs of the owner, lays hers in their place v. 265 --
usually lays but one, this the little foolish bird hatches with great
assiduity, and when excluded, fondly thinks the great ill-looking changeling
her own -- to supply this voracious creature, the credulous nurse toils with
unwearied labor, not sensible she is feeding up an enemy to her race, v. 265
-- the stomach of this bird is enormous, and reaches from the breast bone to
the vent, v. 266 -- its food, v. 265 -- naturally weak and fearful -- the
smaller birds form a train of pursuers; the wry-neck, in particular, the most
active in the chase, v. 266 -- supposed, in winter, to lie hid in hollow trees;
or to pass into warmer climates -- story of a cuckoo found in a willow log, in
winter, v. 267 -- probable opinion concerning its residence in winter --
Brisson makes not less than twenty-eight sorts of this bird; and talks of one
of Brasil, as making a horrible noise in the forests, v. 268, 269 -- follows a
very different trade from what its nurse endeavored to teach it; and,
according to Pliny, in time destroys its instructor, vi. 127 Cuckow-spit, or
Froth-worm, its description, vii. 358 Cud, the hare, the rabbit, and the
squirrel, placed by Pierius among those that chew the cud; how far true, is not
determined, iv. 3 Cuguacu apara, name in Brasil for the roe-buck, iii. 140
Cummin seed, formerly used in dressing a hare in true Roman taste, iv. 15 Cur,
the Cur-fox, iii. 332 Curischaff, a lake where the sturgeon is found in
greatest numbers, vi. 277 Curlew, a small bird of the crane kind -- its
dimensions, vi. 23 -- places where found -- manner of procuring its food, vi.
25 -- its habits, vi. 24 -- its nest, and number of eggs -- season of
courtship. vi. 31 -- a bird of passage, vi. 28 Currants, indigestible to man
when swallowed whole, v. 74 Currents of rivers well explained by the Italians,
i. 200 -- side current -- back current, i. 205 -- sometimes the current at
bottom swifter than at top; and when -- double current, i. 206 -- found to run
in all directions, i. 260 -- manner in which mariners judge of the setting and
rapidity of the current -- currents are generally found most violent under the
equator, i. 261 -- a passage with the current gone in two days, with difficulty
performed in six weeks against it -- currents do not extend above twenty
leagues from the coast -- the currents at Sumatra extremely rapid, run from
south to north -- also strong currents between Madagascar and the Cape of Good
Hope; but the most remarkable are those continually flowing into the
Mediterranean sea, i. 262 -- current runs one way at top, and the ebb another
way at bottom, i. 264 Current of air, driven through a contracted space, grows
more violent and irresistible, i. 355 Cusco, Garcilasso de la Vega asserts the
air is so dry and so cold there, that flesh dries like wood, without
corrupting, ii. 274 Custom, the form of the face seems rather the result of
custom, ii. 238 Cuttle-fish, its description -- contrivance with which it is
furnished by nature, when under a difficulty of escaping, viii. 177 Cybotus, a
lofty mountain swallowed by an earthquake, i. 162 Cynocephalus, the Magot of
Buffon, the last of the ape kind -- its description -- is a native of Africa
and the East, iv. 207. Cyprinus, or the carp, vi. 314 Czar of Russia. See Peter
of Russia
D.
Dam, in the rapacious kinds, leads her young forth for months together; it is
not so with those of the hare kind, iv. 6 Dampier, has added more to natural
history than half the philosophers before him, vi. 397 Damps, of various
natures in mines -- the fulminating sort, i. 79, 80 Dance, hares taught to
dance to music, iv. 9 Dancer, a dog of the mongrel kind, iii. 286 Dane, the
tallest dog bred in England, iii. 286, 290 Danube, has seven openings into the
Euxine sea, i. 132 -- proceeds from the Alps, i. 142 -- its course -- the Turks
and Christians have fleets of men of war upon it, i. 209 -- it receives thirty
lesser rivers, i. 217 -- the huso, or isinglass fish, caught in great
quantities in this river, vi. 282 Dara, its inhabitants use ostriches as
horses, v. 62 Darien, an isthmus -- has a particular hog called warree --
described by Wafer, iii. 196 Darkness, surprising how far the eye accommodates
itself to it, ii. 160 -- remarkable instance of it, in a gentleman, a major
under Charles the First, ii. 161 Daubenton, gives a complete history of a
dwarf, ii. 254, et seq. Deaf men, often found to see the force of those
reasonings, which they could not hear, understanding every word as it was
spoken, ii. 90 -- one born deaf, must necessarily be dumb, ii. 174 -- instances
of two young men, who, born deaf, were restored to hearing, ii. 174, 175 -- a
person born deaf, by time and pains taught to write, read, speak, and by the
motion of the lips, to understand what is said; instances of it, ii. 176, 177
Deafness, one of the most common disorders in old age, ii. 172 -- way to know
this defect either internal, or external, ii. 173 Death, a young man born deaf
and dumb, knew nothing of death, and never thought of it till the age of
twenty-four, when he began to speak of a sudden, ii. 176 -- a spectre which
frights us at a distance, but disappears when we come to approach it, ii. 206
-- uncertainty of the signs of death, ii. 208, 209, 210. Deer, annually
shedding horns, and their permanence in the sheep, draws a distinct line
between their kinds, iii. 36 -- the little Guinea deer, the least of all
cloven-footed quadrupeds, and most beautiful -- its description, iii. 82 -- the
male in Guinea has horns, but the female is without, -- they abound in Java and
Ceylon, iii. 83 -- all of the deer kind want the gallbladder, iii. 94 -- a
downy substance like velvet upon the skin covering the skull of a deer when the
old horn is fallen off, iii. 96 -- their horns grow differently from those of
sheep or cows -- they are furrowed along the sides, and why, iii. 97 -- the
bran deer, or the brown deer, called by the ancients tragelaphus, found in the
forests of Germany, iii. 122 -- the new continent of America produces animals
of the deer kind, in sufficient plenty, iii. 123 Fallow Deer, no animals more
nearly allied than the stag and fallow deer, yet they never herd nor engender
together, nor form a mixed breed -- each form distinct families, and retain an
unalterable aversion -- the fallow deer rarely wild in the forests; are in
general bred in parks, and their flesh is preferred to that of any other
animal, iii. 125 -- a herd of them divides into two parties, and engages each
other with great ardour and obstinacy, iii. 126 -- both desirous of gaining a
favorite spot of the park for pasture, and of driving the vanquished into the
more disagreeable parts -- manner of their combats -- are easily tamed -- and
browze closer than the stag, iii. 127 -- they seek the female at their second
year, iii. 128 -- their strength, cunning, and courage inferior to those of the
stag -- we have in England two varieties of the fallow deer; one brought from
Bengal, the other from Norway, iii. 129 -- flesh of the French fallow deer, has
not the fatness nor the flavor of that fed upon English pasture -- Spanish and
Virginian fallow deer, iii. 130 -- deer without horns, their description, iii.
130, 131 Reindeer, the most extraordinary and most useful, -- native of the
icey regions of the North, it answers the purposes of a horse -- attempts made
to accustom it to a more southern climate, in a few months it declines and
dies, iii. 149 -- answers the purposes of a cow in giving milk; and of the
sheep in furnishing warm clothing to the people of Lapland and Greenland, iii.
150 -- description of the rein deer -- its rutting-time, and that of shedding
its horns, iii. 150 to 152 -- difference between this deer and the stag -- it
is not known to the natives of Siberia -- Americans call it caribou -- herdsmen
of Lapland known to possess a thousand reindeer in a single herd, iii. 153 --
it subsists upon moss, iii. 154 -- and makes the riches of the people of
Lapland, iii. 155 -- gnats and gad flies very formidable to this deer in
Lapland, iii. 156, 157 -- female brings forth in May -- its milk thinner than
that of the cow; sweeter and more nourishing, iii. 158 -- is of two kinds in
Lapland, iii. 162 -- it draws sledges -- can go about thirty miles without
halting, and without dangerous effort -- generally castrated by the Laplanders
-- one male left for six females -- begin to breed when two years old, iii. 163
-- go with young eight months, and bring two at a time -- fondness of the dam
remarkable -- live but fifteen or sixteen years -- manner in which the
Laplanders kill them -- scarce any part of this animal not converted to
peculiar uses, iii. 164 -- the Laplanders find their necessities supplied from
the rein deer alone; in what manner, iii. 166, 167 -- diseases of this animal,
iii. 168 -- the blood of the rein deer preserved in small casks, for sauce with
the marrow in spring -- the horns converted into glue -- the sinews make the
strongest sowing thread -- the tongues a great delicacy -- the intestines,
washed like our tripe, in high esteem among the Laplanders, iii. 167 -- bears
make depredations upon the rein deer, iii. 169 -- glutton its most dangerous
and successful persecutor -- only method of escape from this creature, iii. 170
-- in what manner the reindeer is killed by it, iii. 398, 399 -- the wolf
never attacks a reindeer that is haltered in Lapland, and why, iii. 321
Deformity, children often inherit even the accidental deformities of their
parents -- instances of it, ii. 238 -- accidental deformities become natural;
by assiduity continued and increased, through successive generations, ii. 239
-- all those changes the African, the Asiatic, or the American undergo, in
their color, are accidental deformities, probably to be removed, ii. 242
Demoiselle, name given by the French to the Numidian bird, v. 390 Denmark,
Henry IV. king of Denmark, desirous of trying whether a musician, who boasted
of exciting men to madness, was an impostor, submitted to the operation of his
skill, became mad -- and killed four of his attendants in his transports, ii.
170 Depona, a large serpent, native of Mexico, vii. 227 Derbent, pastures in
these plains excellent for rearing horses, ii. 361 Derbyshire, description of
the nest of an eagle found in the peak of Derbyshire, v. 93 Derham, by a
microscope, discovered in the eye of a mole, the parts known in other animals,
iv. 92 Desman, one of the three distinctions of the musk rat, -- a native of
Lapland, iv. 78 Devil, the Swedish Laplanders consult him, ii. 214 Sea devil,
or fishing frog described, vi. 286 Dew, compensates the want of showers in
Egypt, i. 358 -- hares quench their thirst with it, iv. 7 Dewlap, of two
zebras, seen by the author, the skin hung loose below the jaw upon the neck, in
a kind of dewlap, ii. 398 -- the cow wants in udder what it has in neck, and
the larger the dewlap, the smaller the quantity of its milk, iii. 14 Diableret,
a mountain in France suddenly fallen down, -- its ruins covered an extent of a
league square, i. 157 Dictionaries of Arts and Sciences, a fault that has
infected most of them, ii. 307 Diet, of a thin sparing kind remarkable among
quadrupeds, as well as the human species, to produce hair, iii. 355 Digester,
an instrument -- meat and bones put into it, dissolved into a jelly in six or
eight minutes, i. 308 Digestion, these organs in birds are in a manner
reversed, v. 16 -- is not perfect in all birds that live upon mice, lizards, or
such like food, v. 142 -- performed by some unknown principle in the stomach,
acting in a manner different from all kinds of artificial maceration -- this
animal power lodged the maw in fishes, vi. 165, 166 Diseases, of the rein deer
-- the manner in which the Laplanders cure them, iii. 168, 169 Disorders
infectious, propagated by the effluvia from diseased bodies, i. 327 -- most of
those incident to mankind, says Bacon, arise from the changes of the
atmosphere, vi. 175 -- fishes have their disorders, vi. 347 Diver, (the great
northern) a bird of the smaller tribe of the penguin kind -- the gray speckled
diver, vi. 98 -- the scarlet throated diver, vi. 99 Diverse, known to descend
from twenty to thirty fathom, i. 288 -- of all those who have brought
information from the bottom of the deep, Nicola Pesce, the most celebrated --
account of his performances by Kircher, i. 293 to 297 -- some known to continue
three quarters of an hour under water without breathing -- they usually die
consumptive, vii. 58 -- manner of fishing for pearls, vii. 59 Dodo, its
description, v. 76 -- among birds, as the sloth among quadrupeds, an
unresisting animal, equally incapable of flight or defense -- native of the
Isle of France; the Dutch first discovered and called it the nauseous bird --
travelers deem its flesh good and wholesome, v. 77 -- it is easily taken --
three or four dodos enough to dine an hundred men -- whether the dodo be the
ame bird with that described under the name of bird of Nazareth, remains
uncertain, v. 78 Do, the female of the deer kind, iii. 128 Dogs, always
running with their noses to the ground, supposed of old the first that felt
infection, i. 319 -- no other animal of the carnivorous kind will make a
voluntary attack, but with the odds on their side, ii. 319 -- the Arabian
horses outrun them, ii. 347 -- in the dog kind the chief power lies in the
under jaw, iii. 200 -- in Syria, remarkable for the fine glossy length and
softness of their hair, iii. 212 -- in tropical climates, lose the delicacy of
their scent, and why -- the lion, tiger, panther, and ounce, all natural
enemies to the dog, iii. 262 -- their proper prey are animals unfitted for
climbing, iii. 271 -- dog kind not so solitary as those of the cat, iii. 270 --
they can live for some time upon fruits and vegetables, iii. 272 -- description
of the dog -- knows a beggar by his clothes, by his voice, or his gestures, and
forbids his approach, iii. 273 -- the dog most susceptible of change in its
form, iii. 278 -- all dogs are of one kind, which the original of all the rest,
which the savage dog, whence such a variety of descendants, is no easy matter
to determine, iii. 280 -- the shepherd's the primitive animal of his kind, iii.
281 -- by instinct, without education, dogs take care of flocks and herds, iii.
310 -- those wild in America and Congo, as those of Siberia, Lapland, Iceland,
of the Cape of Good Hope, of Madagascar, Calicut, and Malabar, resemble the
shepherd's dog, iii. 281 -- those in Guinea, at the second or the third
generation, forget to bark, iii. 282 -- dogs of Albany, of Greece, of Denmark,
and of Ireland, larger, and stronger than any other -- shepherd's dog,
transported into temperate climates, and among people entirely civilized, from
influence of climate and food alone, become a matin, a mastiff, or a hound,
iii. 283 -- Turkish dog, iii. 284, 291 -- great Danish dog, iii. 284 -- great
wolf dog, or Irish wolf dog, 284, 292 -- the little Danish dog, iii. 284 --
their variety now in England, much greater than in the times of queen
Elizabeth, iii. 285 -- Dr. Caius divides the whole race into three kinds -- the
generous; the farm kind; the mongrel, iii. 186 -- three shepherd's dogs
reckoned a match for a bear, and four for a lion; three of them overcame a lion
in the time of king James the First -- the famous poet, lord Surry, the first
who taught dogs to set, iii. 289 -- the pug dog, iii. 290 -- the lion dog,
originally from Malta -- its description, iii. 291 -- the Molossian dogs of the
ancients, according to Mr. Buffon, iii. 293 -- Epirotic dogs, mentioned by
Pliny, iii. 295 -- Indian dogs, mentioned by Aelian -- his description of a
combat between a dog and a lion, iii. 295, 296 -- the English bull dog, iii.
290 -- the bravest of the kind -- the nobler kinds of dogs, of which such
beautiful ancient descriptions, now utterly unknown, iii. 295 -- puppies eyes
not open till ten or twelve days old -- dog's teeth amount to forty-two, iii.
302 -- this animal capable of reproducing at the age of twelve months, goes
nine weeks with young, and lives about twelve years, iii. 303 -- other
particulars concerning dogs -- many kinds of birds the dogs will not touch --
dogs and vultures living wild about Grand Cairo in Egypt, continue together in
an amicable manner, and are known to bring up their young in the same nest --
dogs bear hunger for a long time; a bitch forgotten in a country house, lived
forty days, without any other sustenance than the wool of a quilt she had torn
in pieces, iii. 304, 305 -- the wild hunt in packs -- unknown, such as he was
before the protection of man; some from a domestic state, have turned savage,
and partaken of the disposition of the wolf, and attack the most formidable
animals of the forest, iii. 276 -- are easily tamed, and quickly become
familiar and submissive, iii. 277 -- experiments to prove the wolf and the fox
not of the same nature with the dog, but of a species perfectly distinct, iii.
298 -- a dog set at liberty, in his savage fury flew upon every animal, fowls,
dogs and men, iii. 300 -- animals in this country bred between a dog and a fox,
iii. 298 -- the dog and wolf so much alike internally, that anatomists can
scarce perceive the difference, iii. 305 -- a young dog shudders at the the
sight of a wolf -- dogs and wolves so different in their dispositions, that no
animals have a more perfect antipathy, iii. 309 -- show no appetite to enjoy
their victory when the wolf is killed, but leave him where he falls, iii. 318
-- Catesby asserts the wolf was the only dog used by the Americans, before the
Europeans came among them, and that they have since procreated together; thus
proving the dog and the wolf of the same species, iii. 322 -- unsurmountable
antipathy between the dog and the jackall; they never part without an
engagement, iii. 338 -- famished dogs more hairy than those whose food has been
more plentiful, iii. 355 -- all kinds pursue the hare by instinct, and follow
it more eagerly than other animals, iv. 5 -- few dogs dare to encounter the
otter, iv. 153 -- some purposely trained for discovering the retreat of the
otter, iv. 155 Dog butchers all over China, and shambles for selling their
flesh; wherever a dog-butcher appears, all the dogs of the place are in full
cry after him -- along the coasts of Guinea, their flesh is esteemed a delicacy
by the negroes; they give a cow for a dog, iii. 297 Dolphin caught in the Red
Sea, known by a ring to be the same taken before in the Mediterranean, i. 263
-- allured by music, ii. 168 -- not easy to assign a cause why the ancients
have invented so many fables on the subject, vi. 223 -- their boundings in the
water, have taught mariners to prepare for a storm -- old painters and
sculptors have drawn them wrong; the poets have adopted the error, vi. 224 --
Pliny has asserted, they instantly die when taken out of the water; Rondelet
assures us, he has seen a dolphin carried alive from Montpellier to Lions, vi.
225 -- their motions the gambols of pleasure, or the agitations of terror, not
well known -- in fairer weather, they herd together, and pursue shoals of
various fish with impetuosity, vi. 225 Dolphin, is also the name of the
ophidium, or the gilthead, vi. 305 Don, or Tanais, a river, its course, i. 209
-- the sturgeon is caught in great quantities at the mouth of that river, vi.
277 Dorado, a fish of the spinous kind, the most voracious, vi. 340 -- its
description -- the flying-fish is chiefly sought by it -- warfare carried on
between them, vi. 341, 342 -- supposed a ruminating fish, iii. 5 Doree,
description of this fish, vi. 309 Dormouse, the mercury of the thermometer
plunged into the body of a living dormouse, never rose beyond its pitch in air,
and sometimes sunk above a degree, iv. 45 -- the greater sort Mr. Buffon calls
the loir; the middle size he calls the lerot; and the less he denominates the
muscardin, iv. 76 -- their descriptions -- agree in being stupefied like the
marmout during winter, iv. 76, 77 -- their nests and provisions -- they bring
forth three or four young at a time, but once a year, in the spring, iv. 77, 78
Dorrr-beetle, or May-bug, viii. 130. See Beetle. Dottrel, small bird of the
crane kind, vi. 23 Doves, the ring-dove, v. 293 -- the turtle-dove, v. 290 --
the stock-dove, v. 285, 291. See Pigeon. Douc, a monkey of the ancient
continent, so called in Cochinchina, where it is a native -- its description --
forms part of the chain by which the monkies of one continent are linked with
those of the other, iv. 235 Draco volans, a flying ball of fire, i. 380 Drag,
name given by the huntsmen to the tail of the fox, iii. 328 Dragons, the whole
race dwindled down to the flying lizard, vii. 156 Dragon-fly, or the libella,
described, vii. 316 Dragonet, description of this fish, vi. 306 Dreams of
Arlotto, ii. 142 -- he was taken to the Inquisition, and had like to have been
condemned for them, ii. 143 Dress, the first impression generally made, arises
from dress, ii. 99 Drill of Purchase, an ape of the kind of the ouran outang,
iv. 189 Dromedary, a sort of camel, iv. 302 to 311 Drone, a ruminating insect,
or seemingly so, iii. 6 Drones, the second sort of bees, supposed to be the
males, viii. 66 -- their cells, viii. 72 -- the working bees kill the drones in
the worm state, in the cell, and eject them from the hive, among the general
carnage, viii. 86 Drugs in the tropical climates lose their virtue, and become
verminous, i. 314 Drum, among the Swedish Laplanders every family has one for
consulting the devil, ii. 214 -- hares taught to beat the drum, iv. 9 Dryness,
a great degree of it produced by heat, preserves from corruption, ii. 275 Duck,
its eggs often laid under a hen, vi. 127 -- seems a heedless inattentive
mother, vi. 128 -- of the tame duck ten different sorts; and of the wild,
Brisson reckons above twenty -- the most obvious distinction between the wild
and tame ducks -- difference between wild ducks among each other -- sea, and
pond-ducks -- names of the most common birds of the duck kind, among ourselves,
and of the most noted of the foreign tribe, iv. 129, 130 -- their habits,
nests, and number of eggs, vi. 131, 132 -- are, in general, birds of passage --
their flesh, vi. 133 -- the ducks flying in the air, often lured down from
their heights by the loud voice of the mallard from below, vi. 134 -- what part
of the lake they generally choose, vi. 135 -- what can employ them all day, not
easy to guess -- manner of making and managing a decoy to take them, vi. 135 to
138 -- when ducks are caught, the men keep a piece of turf burning near their
mouths, and breathe upon it, lest the fowl smelling them, should escape, v. 11
-- general season for catching them in decoys, from the end of October till
February -- taking them earlier prohibited by an act of George the second,
imposing a penalty of five shillings for every bird destroyed at any other
season -- amazing quantity of ducks sent to supply the markets of London, vi.
139 -- manner of taking them frequently practiced in China vi. 139, 140 -- the
American wood-duck, vi. 130 -- of the numerous tribes of the duck kind, no more
than five breed here, v. 34 -- Plutarch assures us, Cato kept his family in
health, feeding them with duck, whenever they threatened to be out of order,
vi. 111 Dumb, one born deaf, must necessarily be dumb, ii. 174 -- a young man
deaf and dumb from his birth, began to speak all of a sudden, ii. 175 Dung,
some animals void it when pursued -- this arises rather from fear than a desire
of defense, iii. 32 Dunlin, a small bird of the crane kind, vi. 23 Dutch,
solicitous about the preservation of the stork in every part of their republic,
v. 383 Dwarf, in England, as late as the times of king James the first, the
court was furnished with one -- and he was called Little Jeffery -- Peter of
Russia celebrated a marriage of dwarfs, ii. 251, 252 -- they seem to have
faculties resembling those of children, ii. 254 -- history of a dwarf
accurately related by Mr. Daubenton, ii. 254 to 258 Dwina, a river -- its
course and source, i. 210
E.
Eagle kind, distinctive marks from the other kinds of carnivorous birds, v. 85
-- the golden eagle is the largest and the noblest of all those birds designed
by the name of eagle, v. 87 -- its description -- considered among birds, as
the lion among quadrupeds, v. 87, 88 -- strong similitude to each other --
great patience, and much art, required to tame an eagle; though taken young,
and brought under by long assiduity, yet it is a dangerous domestic, and often
turns its force against its master, v. 89 -- sometimes has an attachment for
its feeder; it is then serviceable, and will provide for his pleasures and
support -- flies the highest of all birds, and from thence has by the ancients
been called the bird of heaven -- it has also the quickest eye; but its sense
of smelling is far inferior to that of the vulture -- it never pursues, but in
sight, v. 90 -- finds difficulty in rising when down -- carries away geese,
cranes, hares, lambs, and kids, and often destroys fawns and calves, to drink
their blood, and carries a part of their flesh to its retreats -- infants, when
left unattended, have been destroyed by these rapacious creatures -- the eagle
is peculiarly formidable when bringing up its young -- a poor man got a
comfortable subsistence for his family, during a summer of famine, out of an
eagle's nest, by robbing the eaglets of food, v. 91 -- eagles killed a peasant
who had robbed their nests -- there is a law in the Orkney islands, which
entitles any person that kills an eagle to a hen out of every house in the
parish, in which the plunderer is killed -- the nest of the eagle is usually
built in the most inaccessible cliff of the rock, v. 92 -- description of one
found in the Peak of Derbyshire -- it hatches its eggs for thirty days -- very
rare to find three eaglets in the same nest; and it is asserted, that the
mother kills the most feeble, or the most voracious, v. 93, 94 -- it is
believed they live above an hundred years, and that they die, not of old age,
but from the beaks turning inward upon the under jaw, and preventing their
taking any food -- an eagle endured hunger for twenty-one days, without any
sustenance whatever -- they are first white, then inclining to yellow, and at
last light brown, v. 94 -- age, hunger, captivity, and diseases, make them
whiter -- those kept tame are fed with every kind of flesh, fresh or
corrupting; and upon a deficiency of that, bread, or any other provision, will
suffice -- it is dangerous approaching them, if not quite tame; and they
sometimes send forth a loud piercing lamentable cry, which renders them still
more formidable -- they drink but seldom, and perhaps when at liberty, not at
all, v. 95 -- the bald eagle an inhabitant of North Carolina -- breeds in that
country all the year round -- manner in which the eggs are hatched --
characteristics and habitudes of this animal -- its nest is large enough to
fill the body of a cart, and commonly full of bones half eaten, and putrid
flesh, the stench of which is intolerable, v. 96 -- the flap of an eagle's wing
known to lay a man dead in an instant, v. 9 -- it flies at the bustard or the
pheasant, v. 81 Eagle, the sea-eagle called aquila piombina by the Italians, v.
95 -- they often lay three or four eggs, of a less size than those of a hen, of
a white eliptical form -- distinctive marks of the golden eagle, of the common
eagle, of the bald eagle, of the white eagle, of the kough-footed eagle, of the
white-tailed eagle, of the erne, of the black eagle, v. 97 -- of the sea-eagle,
of the osprey, of the jean le blanc, of the Brasil eagle, of the Oroonoko
eagle, of the crowned African eagle, of the eagle of Pondicherry, v. 98, 99
Ears, distinguishing features in quadrupeds -- serve in them as principal marks
of the passions -- smallest ears in men said to be most beautiful -- the
largest the best for hearing -- some savage nations bore their ears, and draw
that part down, till the tip of the ear rests upon the shoulder, ii. 95 -- the
richest jewels in an Aethiop's ear, a proverb, ii. 98 -- undulations, which
strike the ear, supposed but one continued sound, by their quick successions,
though in reality they make many, ii. 163 -- persons hear differently with one
ear from the other -- these have what musicians call a bad ear; and as hearing
false, also sing false -- such persons also deceived as to the side whence the
sound comes, ii. 173 -- from what cause the small ears of the Tartars and
Chinese, ii. 239 -- those of the hare moveable and capable of direction to
every quarter, iv. 4 -- are remarkably good, iv. 9 -- birds have not the
external ear standing out from the head -- probably the feathers encompassing
ear-holes, supply the defect of the exterior ear, v. 11 Earth, its globe a
million of times less than the sun, i. 3 -- placed at a happy middle distance
from the center, in our solar system -- less distant from the sun than Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars, and less parched up than Venus and Mercury, situated too
near the violence of its power, i. 8, 9 -- the earth, like a chariot-wheel, has
a compound motion, i. 9 -- its rotundity proved, i. 9 -- is rather flatted at
the poles, and its form resembles that of a turnep, i. 9, 10 -- considered as
one scene of extensive desolation, i. 21 -- supposed by Buffon a globe of glass
-- by Whiston a sphere of heated iron -- by Kircher one dreadful volcano -- by
Burnet a great mass of water, i. 51, 52 -- composed of different layers or
beds, lying horizontally one over the other, like the leaves of a book, i. 52
Garden-earth, or mould-earth, a kind of mother, never found an enemy to man, i.
52 -- black earth formed by decayed leaves and branches in Burgundy, i. 55 --
drying and astringent earth preserves bodies from corruption, ii. 276 -- all
such earths as ferment with vinegar, are a composition of shells, decayed, and
crumbled down to one uniform mass, vii. 13 Earthquakes frequent through the
whole region, where a volcano is situated, i. 88 -- various kinds of them
distinguished by philosophers, i. 104 -- and by Mr. Buffon -- air the only
active operator in them, i. 105 -- several opinions upon the cause of them, i.
108 -- activity of internal heat alone sufficient to account for every
appearance attending earthquakes; twelve cities in Asia Minor swallowed up in
one night -- extraordinary earthquake related by Pliny, i. 109, 110 -- account
of that in the year 1693, extending to a circumference of two thousand six
hundred leagues, i. 111 -- minute description of that in Jamaica in 1692, i.
112 to 114 -- account of the dreadful shock in Calabria in 1638, i. 115 to 121
-- concomitant circumstances attending earthquakes, i. 121, 122 Earth-worm of
America often a yard in length, and thick as a walking cane, ii. 6 --
multiplied by being cut in pieces, ii. 23 -- its description, viii. 167. See
Worm. Earwig, its habits, vii. 355 -- reproaches groundless about this animal,
vii. 356 -- its food -- general characteristics of the kind, vii. 357 -- lives
in its winged state a few days -- dies to all appearance consumptive, vii. 358
East Indies, favorable months of embarking for them, i. 346 Echeneis, the
sucking-fish -- its description, vi. 312 Echini, or urchins, a multivalve
shellfish, vii. 61. See Urchins. Echo, no art can make an echo, ii. 172 Edgar,
king of England, the first who attempted to rid this kingdom of wolves, and in
what manner, iii. 319 Edward I. issued his mandate to Peter Corbet to
superintend, and assist in the destruction of wolves, iii. 320 Edward III. made
it felony to steal a hawk, v. 118 Edward IV. his act concerning swans, vi. 119
Eel, described, vi. 311 Effluvia from diseased bodies propagate disorders
called infectious, i. 327 Egg, all birds, most fishes, and many of the insect
tribes, brought forth from eggs, ii. 26 -- warmth of the sun, or of a stove,
efficacious in bringing the animal in the egg to perfection, ii. 27 -- its
description, ii. 28 -- history of the chicken in the egg to its complete
formation, ii. 30 to 35 -- -- quadrupeds brought forth from the egg, above two
hundred at a time, ii. 339 -- the ichneumon discovers and destroys the eggs of
the crocodile, iii. 377 -- the crocodile lays in the sand at a time three or
four hundred, iii. 380 -- some eggs only addled by incubation, v. 24 -- such
birds as undisturbed lay but two or three eggs -- when their eggs are stolen,
lay ten or twelve -- a common hen, moderately fed, lays above an hundred from
the beginning of spring, to the latter end of autumn, v. 30 -- some of the
ostrich weigh above fifteen pounds, v. 56 -- Galen thought the eggs of hens and
pheasants good to be eaten -- those of geese and ostriches are the worst of
all, v. 63 -- and those hatched in the hot sand, where laid, v. 66 -- taking
the eggs of a hawk, punished with imprisonment, and a fine, at the king's
pleasure, in the reign of Edward III. v. 118 -- inhabitants of Norway prepare
from the eggs of the porpoise a kind of caviar, or delicate sauce, and good
when eaten with bread, vi. 228 -- manner in which the eggs of fishes are
impregnated, wholly unknown, vi. 338 -- doubts whether fish come from the egg
completely formed, vi. 336 -- those of the turtle hatched by the sun, vi. 403
Sea-eggs, name given in our cabinets to a multivalve shellfish called echini,
or urchins, by naturalists, vii. 61 -- those of the sea urchin a great
delicacy, vii. 63 -- opening the body of a queen-bee, there appeared in it five
thousand eggs, viii. 76 Eglantine, found in a well dug at Marly, i. 57 Egypt,
has south winds so hot during summer, that respiration is almost stopped by
them -- they are charged with such quantities of sand, that they darken the
air, as with a cloud -- it rains very seldom in that country -- but the want of
showers is compensated by the copiousness of their dews, i. 357, 358 -- the
catacombs, ii. 277 -- a mummy, not long since dug up in France, shows the art
of embalming more completely understood in the western world, than in Egypt
itself, ii. 283 -- the Tingitanians and Egyptians have now the fame of rearing
the finest horses, both for size and beauty, ii. 356 -- the ichneumon used in
this kingdom, for the same purposes that cats are in Europe, iii. 376
Egyptians, carried the art of embalming to the highest perfection, ii. 267 --
copious detail of it, ii. 268 -- paid divine honors to the ibis, v. 384 --
Maillet's observations concerning this bird, v. 385 Eider-duck, vi. 129 --
remarkable for the warmth of its nest, vi. 132 Elaboratory, bowels of
ruminating animals considered as an elaboratory, with vessels in it, iii. 3 --
the chemical apparatus for hatching chickens, v. 168 Elasticity of the air, i.
299, 303 Elder-berries, hurtful to cocks, v. 170 Elephant, not less remarkable
for its size than its docility, all historians concur in giving it the
character of the most sagacious animal next to man, iv. 252 -- its height from
seven to fifteen feet -- impossible to give an idea of this animal's figure by
description; assisted by the art of the engraver, it will but confusedly
represent the original, iv. 253 -- general observations about its conformation
-- of all quadrupeds, the elephant the strongest, and largest; yet neither
fierce, nor formidable -- in its native deserts seldom alone, being a social
friendly creature, iv. 254 -- the oldest conducts the band; the next in
seniority brings up the rear -- order maintained in dangerous marches -- never
so far asunder as to be incapable of reciprocal assistance -- their invasions
the more disagreeable, there being no means of repelling them; since an attempt
to molest a drove would certainly be fatal, iv. 255 -- manner of going against
him who offers the insult -- do no personal injury when suffered to feed
uninterrupted -- molested by man, they seek all occasions to be revenged --
where they like best to live in their natural state -- cannot live far from
water; and always disturb it before they drink -- often fill their trunk with
water, to cool it, or by way of play to spurt it out like a fountain -- equally
distressed by the extremes of heat and cold -- swim from the continent into
islands some leagues distant, iv. 256 -- frequently migrate from one country to
another; and why -- their food of the vegetable kind, loathing all sort of
animal diet -- one finding a spot of good pasture, invites the rest to partake
of it -- precautions by negroes and Indians against them -- they often break
through their fence, destroy the harvest, overturn their habitations, and then
retreat in order, as they made the irruption, iv. 257 -- looks with attention
and friendship at its master -- its ears wipe its eyes, and cover them against
the dust and flies -- it likes music, learns to beat time, move in measure, and
join its voice to the sound of the drum and trumpet -- is pleased with the
odours that delight man, iv. 258 -- the orange flower particularly grateful to
its taste and smell -- picks up flowers, and is pleased with the scent -- seeks
the most odiferous plants for food; prefers the coco, the banana, the palm, and
the sago tree to all others -- eats plants to the roots -- their sense of
touching most delicate -- description of its trunk -- serving all the purposes
of an hand -- breathes, drinks, and smells through the trunk, iv. 259, 260 --
takes a pin from the ground, unties knots of a rope, unlocks a door, and writes
with a pen, iv. 260 -- an object too large for the trunk to grasp, is sucked up
by its breath, lifted and sustained -- the trunk its organ of smelling, of
touching, of suction; of ornament and defense -- its neck so short that it must
turn about to discover what is behind it, iv. 261 -- how the hunters escape its
resentment -- a description of its legs -- while young, it bends the legs; but
when old or sickly, it wants human assistance, and chooses to sleep standing --
a description of its feet, iv. 262 -- and of its tusks -- these, with age,
become so heavy, that it is obliged to rest them in holes in the walls of its
stall -- they are two -- their amazing size -- they proceed from the upper jaw,
not from the frontal bones -- and are not horns, as some have supposed -- nor
ever shed in a domestic state, ii. 263 -- Aelian saw an elephant write Latin
characters on a board, his keeper only showing him the figure of each letter,
iv. 261 -- extraordinary manner of eating -- is not a ruminating animal -- its
stomach and intestines resemble those of a horse -- opinion that the young
elephant sucks with its trunk not with its mouth; referred to future
discoverers, iv. 264, 265 -- the skin not covered with hair, a few bristles in
the scars and wrinkles of the body, and thinly scattered over the skin, the
hide resembles the bark of an old tree more than the skin of an animal -- is
subject to that disorder known by the name of elephantiasis, or Arabian
leprosy, iv. 265 -- in what manner the Indians endeavor to prevent it -- the
flies torment this animal incessantly -- what arts it tries to keep them off --
in a state of nature, it rarely quits the river, and often stands in water up
to the belly, iv. 265, 266 -- from time immemorial employed for the purposes of
labor, of war, to increase the grandeur of eastern princes, or to extend their
dominions -- is a native of Africa and Asia -- still retains its natural
liberty in Africa -- during the splendor of the Carthaginian empire, they were
used in the wars, iv. 267 -- no elephants found on this side mount Atlas --
places where they are in great numbers -- the greatest elephants found in Asia,
their price increases in proportion to their size, iv. 268 -- the largest kept
for princes -- their color -- that appropriated for the monarchs own riding,
kept in a palace, attended by nobles, and almost adored by the people --
opinions concerning the white elephant -- the eastern princes maintain as many
elephants as they are able, and place great confidence on their assistance in
an engagement -- they never breed in a state of servitude, and the generative
powers fail when it comes under the dominion of man, iv. 269 -- duration of
pregnacy, in the female, still a secret -- what Aristotle and others say
concerning this and their young is doubtful, iv. 270 -- method of taking them
wild in the woods, iv. 271, 272 -- negroes of Africa, who hunt this animal for
its flesh, take it in pit-falls, iv. 273 -- its attachment to the person that
attends it -- it comprehends several of the signs made to it, distinguishes the
tone of command from that of anger or approbation, and acts accordingly --
executing orders with prudence, eagerly, yet without precipitation -- is taught
to kneel down, to receive its rider, usually mounted upon its neck -- caresses
those it knows, salutes such as ordered to distinguish, and helps to take up
part of its load -- takes a pleasure in the finery of its trappings -- draws
chariots, cannon, or shipping with strength and perseverance; and satisfaction,
provided it be not corrected without a cause, and that its master be pleased
with its exertions -- in what manner the conductor guides it -- frequently
takes such an affection to its keeper as to obey no other; has been known to
die of grief for killing its conductor in a fit of madness -- surprising
instance of moderation in its fury -- a word sufficient to put it into motion,
iv. 275 -- a century or two ago the Indian generals made great dependence upon
the number and the expertness of their elephants; of late they are little used,
except for drawing cannon, and transporting provisions -- still they are used
in war in Siam, in Cochin-China, in Tonquin, and Pegu, iv. 276 -- in what
manner armed and led to battle -- effects of its fury in the field -- those
placed upon its back in a square tower, combat as from an eminence, and fling
down their weapons with double force -- nothing more dreadful, or more
irresistible, than such moving machines, to men unacquainted with the modern
arts of war -- Romans quickly learned the art of opening their ranks to admit
the elephant, iv. 277 -- and separating it from assistance, compelled its
conductors to calm the animal's fury, and to submit -- sometimes, instead of
obeying, turned upon those it was employed to assist; one elephant is known to
consume as much as forty men in a day -- they are now chiefly employed in
carrying or drawing burdens throughout the peninsula of India -- it can, with
ease, draw more than six horses can remove -- it carries upon its back three or
four thousand weight; and upon its tusks it can support near a thousand -- when
pushed, it moves as swiftly as a horse at full gallop -- it travels fifty or
sixty miles a day; and hard pressed almost double that quantity -- heard
trotting on at a great distance, iv. 278 -- its tract is deeply impressed on
the ground, and from fifteen to eighteen inches in diameter -- used, in India,
as executioners, and with what dexterity they perform the horrid task --
sometimes they impale the criminal on their enormous tusks, iv. 279 -- two
surprising instances how sensible it is of neglect, iv. 275, 279 -- the keeper
despising its endeavors in launching a ship, the animal redoubled its efforts,
fractured its skull, and died upon the spot, iv. 279 -- revenge one of them
took upon a tailor who pricked its trunk with a needle in Deli, iv. 280 -- is
mindful of benefits, iv. 279 -- instance of it, iv. 280 -- at the Cape of Good
Hope they are hunted for the sake of their teeth -- in what manner -- account
of an unhappy huntsman, iv. 280, 281 -- teeth of the elephant found in a fossil
state -- two great grinding teeth, and part of the tush of an elephant,
discovered at the depth of forty-two yards, in a lead mine in Flintshire --
tusks of the elephants that come from Africa, seldom exceed two hundred and
fifty pounds, iv. 282 -- it is defeated by the rhinoceros, iv. 287 -- not
afraid singly to make opposition to the lion, iii. 225 Elephantiasis, or the
Arabian leprosy, a disease to which man and the elephant are equally subject,
-- in what manner the Indians endeavor to prevent it, iv. 265 Elizabeth,
(queen) her injunction upon fasting, ii. 131 -- in her times, the whole kingdom
could not supply two thousand horses to form the cavalry, ii. 370 Ellis, his
principal experiment upon coraline substances, viii. 196 Elk, its size equal to
that of the elephant, iii. 140 -- is an animal rather of the buck than the stag
kind -- known in America by the name of moose-deer -- is sometimes taken in the
German and Russian forests; but extremely common in North America, iii. 140 --
its horns fortuitously dug up in many parts of Ireland, measuring ten feet nine
inches from tip to tip -- a small one, the size of a horse, and the horns
little larger than those of a common stag, iii. 141 -- Jocelin and Dudley
describe this animal about eleven feet high; others extend their accounts to
twelve and fourteen feet -- never dissturbs any other animal, when supplied
itself -- a female of this kind shown at Paris in the year 1742 -- its
description -- they gave it thirty pounds of bread every day, beside hay, and
it drank eight buckets of water, iii. 142, 143 American Elk, of two kinds, the
gray and the black; described -- they prefer cold countries, feeding upon grass
in summer, and the bark of trees in winter -- time and manner of hunting them,
iii. 144 to 147 -- its flesh very well tasted, and very nourishing -- its hide
strong, and so thick as to turn a musket-ball; yet is soft and pliable, iii.
147 -- this animal troubled with the epilepsy -- is but very indifferently and
confusedly described by travelers -- their various descriptions, iii. 148, 149
-- in what manner killed by the glutton, iii. 398, 399 Elops, or Sea-serpent,
its description, vi. 310 Ely, an island, the country round it was once a most
delightful spot, i. 279 -- producing grapes that afforded excellent wine -- the
sea breaking in, overwhelmed the whole country, i. 280 Emanuel, (king of
Portugal) to try the strength of the elephant and rhinoceros, made them fight,
and the elephant was defeated, iv. 287 Embalming, the Egyptians carried this
art to perfection, ii. 267 -- copious detail of this art as practiced among
them -- in Genesis, Joseph seeing his father expire, ordered his physicians to
embalm the body -- various methods of embalming, ii. 268, 269 -- the art still
among the Guanches, ancient inhabitants of the island of Teneriff, when the
Spainards conquered it -- particulars of their method of embalming, ii. 272 --
the Peruvians also understood this art, according to Father Acosta, ii. 274 --
a mummy lately dug up in France, shows the art more completely understood in
the western than the eastern world, ii. 283 Embroidery, done in India with
porcupine quills, as belts, baskets, and necessary pieces of furniture, iv. 112
Embryo, its first rudiments, ii. 39 -- in a month an inch long, ii. 41 -- the
male developes sooner than the female, ii. 42 -- progress and increase of it,
ii. 40 to 47, and 61 -- in the human, the under jaw much advanced before the
upper, ii. 91 -- brain, and spinal marrow, first seen begun, ii. 146 -- the
bones as soft as the flesh, ii. 193 Emigration, causes of emigrations of birds,
v. 32 -- in what manner performed, v. 35 Emu, an inhabitant of the New
Continent, called also the American ostrich -- description and places where
found -- runs so swiftly, the dogs lose the pursuit, v. 64, 65 -- one
surrounded by hunters, the dogs avoided its rage -- peculiar in hatching its
young, v. 66 -- the young at first familiar follow any person -- as they grow
older, become cunning and distrustful -- their flesh good to be eaten -- they
live entirely upon grass, v. 67 Encoubert of Buffon, the tatou of Ray, a shelly
quadruped, iv. 132 England claims dominion over the seas encompassing Great
Britain and Ireland, i. 232 -- losing its superiority upon the ocean, its
safety becomes precarious, i. 233 -- late as king James I. the court still
furnished with a dwarf, a giant, and a jester, ii. 251 -- the ass entirely lost
under queen Elizabeth, ii. 385 -- not infested with wolves, iii. 319 -- the
viper the only venomous animal there, vii. 203 Enquiries most intricate
generally most useless, ii. 21 Entry, a term in the chase of the stag, iii. 114
Ephemera, various kinds of this insect, vii. 361 -- its description, vii. 362
-- colors of their aurelias, vii. 363 -- their transmutations, vii. 365 --
places where found in abundance -- short duration -- their impregnation, vii.
364 to 368 Epicure, the greatest has the most depraved taste, ii. 184
Epiphanius (St.) lived an hundred and fifteen years, ii. 132 Equator,
description of the regions under it, i. 13 Ermine, its description -- alike in
figure to the weasel, iii. 353 -- its fur the most valuable of any -- the time
in which it is called the stoat, iii. 354 -- manner of moulting its hair, iii.
357 -- one ate honey, and died shortly after -- proof of a distinct species
from the pole-cat or the martin -- one of these fed with eggs and flesh, let
them putrefy before it touched either -- in Siberia, taken in traps baited with
flesh; and in Norway, shot with blunt arrows or taken in traps -- sometimes
found white in Great Britain, and is then called white weasel -- its fur among
us of no value, iii. 358 -- preys upon the leming, iv. 89 Erne, kind of eagle
-- its distinctive marks, v. 97 Eruption of a volcano, remarkable, in 1537, i.
89, 90 -- of Vesuvius, in which Pliny the naturalist was suffocated, and the
city of Herculaneum was overwhelmed, i. 91 -- another, of the same mountain, in
1707, described, i. 91 to 94 -- of Cotopaxi, in 1743, described by Ulloa, i.
100, 101 -- matter thus exploded lies a little below the bed of the mountains,
in Mr. Buffon's system, i. 101 -- but supplied from the deeper regions of the
earth, i. 103 Esculapian serpent of Italy -- its excrement a pleasing perfume,
vii. 184 -- a domestic creature, vii. 223 Esox, or the pike, description of
this fish, vi. 313 Esquimaux Indians described, ii. 213, et seq. Evaporation,
cold diminishing the force of menstruums, promotes evaporation -- theory for
the formation of the clouds, i. 370 -- prevented by moist weather -- dry frost
assists evaporation, i. 371 Evils, thousands of natural evils permitted to
exist in the world, and why, i. 20 Eunuchs of two kinds, the white and the
black -- made in Italy to improve the voice, ii. 73 -- instance, in our
country, of a very fine woman married to an eunuch, ii. 74 Euphaemia, a city in
Calabria, sunk by an earthquake, i. 119 Euphrates, a river, its sources, i.
211, 212 -- receives eleven rivers, i. 217 Eurites, a city swallowed by an
earthquake, i. 162 Europeans resemble our common parent more than any of the
rest of his children, ii. 239 -- argument which suffices to prove it, ii. 240
Eustachian tube, a passage from the ear into the mouth -- its use, ii. 173 Ewe,
with the buck-goat, produces an animal that in two or three generations returns
to the sheep, and retains no marks of its ancient progenitor, iii. 35
Excrements of some serpents kept as the most pleasing perfume at Calicut and
Cranganon, in East India, vii. 184 Executioner, elephants in India used as such
-- impale the criminals on their tusks, iv. 279 Exercise, manual, hares taught
to go through it, iv. 9 Exhalations, mineral, raised by subterranean heat, i.
338 -- when copious, every where fatal, i. 326 Exocetas, the flying fish, its
description, vi. 314 Expedition against Carthagena, in America, i. 322 -- and
the Havannah, i. 323 Experience, repeated, shows how seldom pains are suffered,
or pleasures enjoyed, to the utmost, ii. 208 Experiment, by Mr. Belcher, upon
the circulation of the blood through the bones, ii. 194 -- made by approaching
a looking-glass to the mouth, to discover breathing, very uncertain, ii. 209 --
of a carp placed under an air-pump, vi. 169 -- the famous experiment of
Malpighi, concerning the stigmata of the caterpillar, viii. 14 Extraneous, or
fossil shells, found in the bowels of the earth, vii. 15 Eyes, opened by the
infant the moment of its birth, ii. 54 -- particularly in them the passions are
painted, ii. 81 -- small and nearly closed, are liked in China and Japan, ii.
77 -- different colors of the eye, whence they arise, ii. 82 -- eyes of oxen
are brown; those of sheep of a water-colour; of goats are gray; and those of
most white animals are red, ii. 83 -- distance between the eyes less in man
than in any other animal, ii. 84 -- Montaigne disliked those men who shut one
eye in looking upon any object, ii. 94 -- in what circumstances women with
child are said to be all mouth and eyes -- the lower eyelids, in women with
child, drawn downwards, ii. 104 -- of all parts the animal has double, the eyes
produced soonest, ii. 145 -- privation of feeling and sight would misrepresent
the situation and number of all things around us, ii. 147 -- two contribute to
distinct and extensive vision, ii. 149 -- both eyes see round the object, and
give it that heightened relief which no painting does attain to -- in either is
there a point which has no vision, the defect is corrected by having the organ
double, ii. 150 -- easy experiment to be convinced of it, ii. 150, 151 --
objects at a distance are rarely equal in both eyes, ii. 157 -- the best eye
sees objects largest -- infants having their eyes less, must see objects
smaller in proportion, ii. 158 -- when we look at an object extremely
brilliant, vision becomes indistinct, and why, ii. 159 -- how far the eye can
accommodate itself to darkness -- remarkable instance of it in a major under
king Charles I. ii. 160, 161 -- whence have arisen the small eyes of the
Tartars and Chinese, ii. 239 -- eastern poets compare the eyes of their
mistresses to those of the gazelle -- the Greeks resemble the eyes of a
beautiful woman to those of a cow, iii. 72 -- of all animals, natives of this
climate, none have an eye so beautiful as the stag, iii. 105 -- that of the
wolf opens slantingly upwards in the same direction with the nose, iii. 307 --
of the fox placed obliquely, like those of the wolf, iii. 324 -- of the civet
shine in the night, iii. 394 -- those of the hare placed backwards, to see
behind it as it runs, and these are never wholly closed, iv. 4 -- peculiar
advantages of smallness of the eye in the mole, iv. 94 -- description of the
eyes of birds of the owl kind, v. 137 -- in the eyes of all animals, a complete
provision to shut out too much light, or to admit a sufficiency, by contraction
and dilatation of the pupil, v. 138 -- those of the great Greenland whale not
larger than those of an ox, vi. 196 -- of the snail on the points of its
largest horns, vii. 20 -- peculiarities in the eyes of the cameleon, vii. 155
-- eyes of the butterfly have not all the same form -- the outward coat has a
luster displaying the various colors of the rainbow -- examined a little
closely, it will be found to have the appearance of a multiplying-glass, viii.
35, 36 -- the beetle in its worm state has no eyes, viii. 132 Eyebrows joining
in the middle considered a peculiar grace by Tibullus, and by the Persians, ii.
76 -- Le Brun's directions, regarding the passions, place the principal
expression in them, ii. 84 -- such as have them most at command are the best
actors, ii. 85 -- the Talapoins of Siam shave the eyebrows of the children
committed to their care, ii. 96 Eye-lashes, men and apes only have them upon
the upper and lower lids -- all other animals want them on the lower lid, ii.
85 Eyelids, in birds and amphibious quadrupeds, the lower lid alone has motion
-- fishes and insects have no eyelids, ii. 85
F.
Face, its form the result of custom, ii. 238 -- a modern lady's face formed
like that of Venus de Medicis, or of the sleeping Vestal, would scarce be
deemed beautiful, except by the lovers of antiquity, ii. 265 Falcon gentle, a
kind of hawk, iii. 84 -- it pursues the gazelles, iii. 84, 85 -- many people
admire its flesh, and dress it for eating, says Belonius, v. 85 -- method of
training up this bird, v. 124 -- falconry, much difused among us, was a
principal amusement of our ancestors, v. 118 -- the falcon-gentle and the
peregrine much less than the gyr-falcon, which exceeds all others in largeness
-- description of the gyr-falcon -- a courageous and fierce bird, not fearing
the eagle -- it chiefly flies at the stork, the heron, and the crane, v. 120,
121 -- is chiefly found in the northern regions, but loses neither strength nor
courage, when brought into the milder climates -- the falcon-gentil moults in
March and sooner -- the peregrine does not moult till August, v. 121 -- the
common falcon is of such spirit, that, like a conqueror in a country, he keeps
all in awe and subjection to his prowess, v. 122 -- young falcons, though
depressed by captivity, will, when brought out, fly at barnacles and wild
geese, v. 123 -- the falcon's pursuit of the heron, kite, or woodlark, the most
delightful sport, v. 127 -- names of the falcons in use here and in other
countries, v. 119 -- among the Welsh, the king's falconer the fourth officer of
the state; was forbid to take more than three draughts of beer from his horn,
lest he should neglect his duty, v. 118 Falconers catch the kite for the
purposes of training the falcon and how, v. 144 Fallopius, the two tubular
vessels perceived by him, ii. 17 Famine supported by carnivorous animals for
several weeks together, ii. 323 Fasting, queen Elizabeth enjoined her subjects
to fast from flesh on Fridays and Saturdays, to favor the consumption of fish,
and multiply the number of mariners, and to spare the stock of sheep, ii. 131
Fat of the chamois, its medicinal virtue -- fat of animals found efficacious in
some disorders, iii. 69 -- of the manati, exposed to the sun, has a fine smell
and taste, and exceeds the fat of any sea-animal -- the heat of the sun will
not spoil, it nor make it rancid -- several other qualities of this fat, iv.
185, 186 Father-lasher, description of this fish, vi. 308 Fawn, name of the
buck and the do the first year, iii. 128 Feathers of birds described, v. 6 --
of the ostrich almost as soft as down, v. 50 -- different uses made of
goose-feathers, vi. 124, 125 Feather-beds utterly unknown in countries
bordering on the Levant, and all Asia, vi. 125 -- ancients did not use
feather-beds -- Pliny speaks of bolsters of feathers for their heads --
feathers make a considerable article of commerce -- different qualities -- best
method of curing them -- old feathers more valuable than new, vi. 125, 126
Fecundity of the rabbit greater than of the hare, iv. 16 Feeling, deprived of
feeling, our eyes would misrepresent the situation and the number of all things
around us, ii. 147 -- blind men have this sense finer than others, and why --
the grossest and most useful of the senses -- no total deprivation of it but
with life -- those parts most exercised in it, acquire the greatest accuracy --
the fingers, by habit, greater in the art than others, not from their having
more nerves, ii. 185 -- fishes having no organs for feeling, must be the most
stupid of all animals -- feeling, the guardian, the judge, and the examiner of
all the senses, is never found to deceive, ii. 186 Ferret has eyes of a red
color, ii. 83 -- not found at present here but in the domestic state -- its
description -- a native of the torrid zone, iii. 359, 360 -- naturally such an
enemy of the rabbit, that a young ferret, although unacquainted with the kind,
will fiercely attack and bite even a dead one -- use of ferrets in warrens to
enter the holes muzzled, and drive the rabbits into the nets at the mouth, iii.
360 -- to bring the ferret from his hole, straw and other substances burnt at
the mouth -- the female less than the male, whom she seeks with great ardour,
and often dies without being admitted, iii. 361 -- they sleep continually, and
the instant they awake seem eager for food -- are usually fed with bread and
milk -- breed twice a year -- some devour their young as soon as brought forth,
and then become fit for the male again -- the litter usually from five to six
young; and these consist of more females than males -- its scent foetid -- has
attacked and killed children in the cradle -- is easily irritated, and then
smells more offensively -- its bite difficult of cure -- has eight grinding
teeth -- to the ferret kind may be added an animal called by Mr. Buffon the
vansire, iii. 362 -- comes originally from Africa, iv. 22 Fever, opinion that
the lion is in a continual fever, iii. 224 Fewmet, name for the excrement of
the stag, iii. 113 Fibers, muscular, compose the stomachs of insects, iii. 6.
Fieldfare, bird of the sparrow kind, v. 314, 317, 323 Fielding affirms he never
knew a person with a steady glavering smile, but he found him a rogue, ii. 94
Figure, little known exactly of the proportion of the human figure, ii. 106 --
different opinions concerning it, ii. 107 -- whence proceed the variations in
the human figure, ii. 239 -- the oldest measure of the human figure in the
monument of Cheops, in the first pyramid of Egypt, ii. 264 Finder, a dog of the
generous kind, iii. 286 Fins, different purposes they answer in fishes, vi. 155
to 158 -- those of the whale -- their use, vi. 194, 195, 200 Fin-fish, vi. 193
-- its food, vii. 202 Fingers, by habit, and not from a greater number of
nerves, become exacter in the art of feeling than any other part, even where
sensation is more delicate and fine, ii. 185 Fire, perpetual, in the kingdom of
Persia, i. 86 -- advantages arising from the subterranean fires, i. 124, 125 --
put out by the sun shining upon it, and why, i. 333, 334 -- fleeting balls of
fire, i. 377 -- great globe of fire seen at Bononia in Italy, not less than a
mile long and half a mile broad, i. 382 -- lighted to preserve herds and flocks
from animals of the cat kind, iii. 222 Fireflare, Pliny, Aelian, and Oppian,
supply the weapon of this fish with a venom affecting even the inanimate
creation -- reasons to doubt of it, vi. 259, 260, 261 Fishes petrified, found
in the mountains of Castravan, i. 45 -- fish in abundance found in a new formed
island -- those who eat of them died shortly after, i. 126 -- cannot live in
water, whence the air is exhausted, i. 316 -- showers of fishes first raised in
the air by tempests, i. 390 -- most of them produced from the egg, ii. 26 --
have no eyelids at all, ii. 85 -- nor any neck, ii. 102 -- are allured by
music, ii. 168 -- having no organs for feeling, must be stupid, ii. 186 --
ruminating sort, iii. 5 -- opinion, that all fish are naturally of the salt
element, and have mounted up into fresh water by accidental migration -- some
swim up rivers to deposit their spawn; of which the size is enormous, and the
shoals endless -- all keep to the sea, and would expire in fresh water, vi. 153
-- the number to which names are given, and of the figure of which something is
known, according to Linnaeus, are above four hundred -- their pursuits,
migrations, societies, antipathies, pleasures, times of gestation, and manner
of bringing forth, are all hidden in the turbulent element that protect them --
the history of fishes can have little in it entertaining; for instead of
studying their nature, pains have been taken to increase their catalogues, vi.
154 -- that shape granted to most fishes, is imitated in such vessels as are
designed to sail with the greatest swiftness -- any large fish overtakes a ship
in full sail, with great ease -- the chief instruments in the motion of a fish
are the fins -- in some they are more numerous than in others -- it is not
always the fish with the greatest number of fins that have the swiftest motion,
vi. 155 -- how the fins assist the fish in rising or sinking, in turning, or
leaping out of the water -- all this explained by the experiment of a carp put
into a large vessel, vi. 155 to 158 -- all fishes covered with a slimy,
glutinous matter, that defends their bodies from the immediate contact of the
surrounding fluid -- they fall behind terrestrial animals in their sensations
-- their sense of touching and smelling, vi. 159 -- their sense of tasting, vi.
160 -- hearing is found still more imperfect, if found at all, vi. 161 -- Mr.
Gouan's experiment to this purpose -- from it is learned they are as deaf as
mute -- their sense of seeing, vi. 162 -- their brain, vi. 163 -- their
rapacity insatiable; when out of the water, and almost expiring, they greedily
swallow the bait by which they were allured to destruction, vi. 164 -- the maw
placed next the mouth; and though possessed of no sensible heat, is endued with
a faculty of digestion, contrary to the system, that the heat of the stomach is
alone sufficient for digestion, vi. 165 -- though for ever prowling, can suffer
want of food very long -- instances of it, vi. 166 -- life of a fish but one
scene of hostility, violence, and evasion, vi. 167 -- the causes of annual
migrations, vi. 168 -- all stand in need of air for support -- those of the
whale kind come to the surface of the sea every two or three minutes to breathe
fresh air -- experiment of a carp in a large vase of water, placed under an
air-pump, vi. 169 -- general method of explaining respiration in fishes, vi.
170 -- the description and uses of their air bladder, vi. 171 to 175 -- full
play of the gills prevented, or the bony covers kept from moving, the animal
would fall into convulsions, and die, vi. 170 -- some fishes have no
air-bladder, vi. 174 -- can live but a few minutes without air -- nothing more
difficult to account for, than the manner of their getting this supply, vi. 170
-- no part of the account of the use of the air-bladder well supported, vi. 172
-- Bacon's observations upon their growth and age -- two methods for
determining the age of fishes, more ingenious than certain -- a carp found to
be a hundred years old -- the discovery confirmed by authors, vi. 175, 176 --
longevity of these animals, nothing compared to their fecundity -- some
multiply by millions -- some bring forth their young alive, and some produce
eggs -- the former rather the least fruitful -- the viviparous blenny brings
forth two or three hundred at a time, all alive, and playing together round the
parent, vi. 177 -- different seasons for depositing spawn, vi. 180 -- some
fishes have the tenderness of birds or quadrupeds for their young, vi. 181 --
their copulation as yet a doubt, vi. 179 -- Apicius noted for first teaching to
suffocate fish in Carthaginian pickle, vi. 182 -- the flesh of fishes --
question to the learned concerning the flesh of fishes, vi 183 -- cetaceous
fishes, vi. 185 -- cartilaginous fishes, vi. 231 -- sucking-fish sticks to the
shark -- called the shark's pilot, and why, vi. 246 -- all fish more delicate
about a baited hook than their ordinary food, vi. 252 -- best bait for all is
fresh herring cut in pieces of a proper size, vi. 256 -- experience shows, the
larger fish take a living small one upon the hook sooner than any other bait,
vi. 257 -- more than those of the ray kind possessed of the numbing quality --
Condamine informs us of a fish with the powers of the torpedo, and resembling a
lamprey, vi. 267 -- lamprey of the English Severn the most delicate fish
whatever, vi. 270 -- galley-fish, described, vi. 293 to 295 -- pipe-fish, vi.
289 -- lump-fish, vi. 287 -- sun-fish, vi. 285, 286 -- spinous fishes, vi. 303
-- Mr. Gouan's system of spinous fishes, vi. 304 to 315 -- use of it, vi. 315,
316 -- all fish of the same kind have the same number of bones, vi. 318 -- the
small, lean, and with many fins, the most bony, vi. 319 -- vulgar expression,
that fishes at some seasons are more bony than at others, scarce deserves
contradiction, vi. 318 -- none imbibe the sea-saltness with their food, or in
respiration -- whence then do some fishes live there, and quickly expire in
fresh water -- some tribes live only in the sea; others only in fresh water;
some a part the season in one, and a part in the other, as the salmon, the
shad, the smelt, and the flounder, vi. 321 -- some fish, as the eel, descend
the fresh water stream, to bring forth their young in the sea -- in what
season, vi. 323 -- long voyages undertaken by some tribes that constantly
reside in the ocean, and may be called fish of passage -- stated returns and
regular progress of these fish of passage the most extraordinary circumstances
in the history of nature, vi. 324 -- names of several migrating fishes -- of
all such, the herring and pilchard take the most adventurous voyages, vi. 325,
326 -- places where found in abundance, vi. 327 -- manner in which the eggs of
fish are impregnated wholly unknown, vi. 338 -- in the islands of the Indian
Ocean, an over quantity, in shoals, on the swamps, dried up by the sun -- the
putrefaction renders the country unhealthful -- amazing propagation along our
coasts and rivers not proportionate to the quantities among the islands of the
Indian Ocean, vi. 335 -- places where the spawn is deposited -- doubts whether
most fish come from the egg completely formed, vi. 336 -- growth of fishes, vi.
339 -- instance in the growth of the mackarel -- all live upon each other in
some state of their existence -- of those in the ocean of the spinous kinds,
the dorado the most voracious, vi. 340 -- flying-fish chiefly sought by the
dorado -- their warfare, vi. 341 -- opinion that all fishes are natives of the
sea, founded upon their superior fecundity of breeding twenty to one --
certainly fresh water fishes abate of their courage and rapacity, vi. 343 --
greediness of the seafish to devour the bait prodigious, compared with the
manner it is taken in fresh water -- difference of baits with which they are
caught vi. 344 -- some fishes rendered so torpid in the northern rivers, as to
be frozen up in the masses of ice, and continue there several months, seemingly
without life or sensation, waiting the approach of a warmer sun, to restore
them to life and liberty -- each species of fish infested with worms of
different kinds, vi. 347 -- most vivacious animals -- often live upon
substances poisonous to the more perfect classes of animated nature -- numbers
of fishes making poisonous wounds, scarcely to be doubted, vi. 348 -- some
fishes being poisonous is notorious, the cause inscrutable -- Dr. Grainger,
after residing many years at St. Christopher's, affirms that of fish caught at
one end of the island, some were good and wholesome, while others of the same
kind, taken at a different end, were dangerous and commonly fatal -- the
Philosophical Transactions give an account of poisonous qualities of fish, at
New Providence -- all kinds, at different times alike dangerous; the same
species this day serving as nourishment, the next found fatal -- speculations
and conjectures to which these poisonous qualities have given rise, vi. 349,
350 File-fish, most wonderful of the shelly tribe, vii. 65. See Pholades.
Fishery of pearls, several -- chiefly carried on in the Persian Gulf, vii. 56
-- the people destined for the pearl-fisheries -- they die consumptive, vii. 58
-- in what manner they fish for pearls, vii. 59 Fishing-frog, from its
deformity called sea devil, vi. 286 -- conceit that this fish uses its two long
beards or filaments for fishing -- Rondelet says, that the bowels taken out,
the body appears transparent; and with a lighted candle in it, has a formidable
appearance -- fishermen have a great regard for this ugly fish, as an enemy to
the dog-fish; when taken they set it at liberty, vi. 287 Fissures,
perpendicular, found in every field, and every quarry -- their causes, i. 62
Fistularia, description of this fish, vi. 313 Flame will burn under water --
none found continuing to burn without air, i. 333 Flamingo, the most remarkable
of the crane kind, the tallest, bulkiest, and most beautiful, vi. 10 -- its
description -- chiefly found in America, once known on all the coasts of
Europe, vi. 10, 11 -- in deserted regions, the flamingos live in a state of
society, and under a better polity than others of the feathered creation --
delicacy of its flesh, vi. 11 -- when the first Europeans in America killed
one, the rest regarded the fall in fixed astonishment; thus the fowler levelled
the flock, before any began to escape -- it is now one of the scarcest, and
shyest birds in the world, vi. 12 -- places it chiefly inhabits -- always
appoint one as a watch -- who gives notice of danger with a voice as shrill as
a trumpet, vi. 12, 13 -- negroes fond of their company, and think their society
a gift of heaven, and protection from evils, iv. 14 -- those killed hidden in
the long grass, to prevent ill treatment from the blacks discovering the murder
of their sacred birds -- are frequently taken with nets; refuse all
nourishment, when taken, pine and die, if left to themselves in captivity, vi.
14, 15 -- its tongue is the most celebrated delicacy, a dish of them, says
Labat, is a feast for an emperor -- a Roman emperor had fifteen hundred
flamingos tongues served up in a dish -- their tongue larger than that of any
other bird -- its flesh, vi. 315 -- they move in rank like cranes -- appear in
flight, of a bright red as a burning coal -- manner of feeding very singular --
savages of Canada call it tococo, and why, vi. 16, 17 -- time of breeding and
their nests, vi. 17 -- number of their eggs -- color when young -- then become
familiar in five or six days, eat out of the hand, and drink seawater; but
generally pine away, wanting their natural supplies, and die in a short time,
vi. 19 -- savages make ornaments of their plumes; and the skin sometimes serves
the Europeans to make muffs, vi. 19 Flea, its description, vii. 268 -- it can
draw a chain an hundred times heavier than itself, and eat ten times its own
size of provision in one day, vii. 248 -- persecutes the hare, iv. 12 --
Lewenhoeck has discovered above six thousand facets on the cornea of a flea,
viii. 36 -- arhorescent water-flea, or monoculus, described, vii. 288 Flemings
possessed the art of cloth-working in a superior degree -- were invited to
settle here, iii. 43 Flesh, dries at Cusco like wood, without corrupting, ii.
274 -- the Persians esteem that of the wild ass so highly that its delicacy is
a proverb among them, ii. 378 -- of the fallow deer preferred to any other,
iii. 125 -- of the roe-buck between one and two years old, allowed the greatest
delicacy known, iii. 139 -- of the tiger is good for food, some hold it
superior to mutton, iii. 249 -- of dogs sold in shambles all over China, iii.
297 -- and the negroes of the coasts of Guinea esteem it a delicacy -- as
likewise that of toads, lizards, and tigers, iii. 297, 298 -- that of the wolf
very indifferent; no creature known to eat it but the wolf himself, iii. 323 --
of the squash, tolerable food, iii. 385 -- that of the glutton not fit to be
eaten, iii. 402 -- of the hare religiously abstained from by Jews, ancient
Britons, and Mahometans, iv. 14 -- of the paca considered a great delicacy, iv.
54 -- of the tendrac, thought by the Indians a great delicacy, iv. 107 -- of
the pangolin considered a very great delicacy by the negroes of Africa, iv. 121
-- of the armadilla, of tatou, said to be delicate eating, iv. 130 -- of the
seal formerly found place at the tables of the great, iv. 180 -- of the monkey
liked by the negroes, iv. 224 -- of the ostrich proscribed in scripture, unfit
to be eaten, v. 53 -- of the emu, or the American ostrich, good to be eaten, v.
67 -- of the dodo, good and wholesome eating, v. 77 -- of the vulture, falcon,
and osprey, when young, excellent food according to Belonius, v. 85 -- that of
carnivorous birds stringy and ill-tasted, soon corrupting, and tinctured with
that animal food upon which they subsist, v. 84 -- of the bird condor, as
disagreeable as carrion, v. 102 -- of the peacock, keeps longer unputrefied
than of any other animal, v. 173 -- of the pheasant, considered as the greatest
dainty -- of the quail, a very great delicacy, v. 214 -- that of the partridge,
so valued by the French, according to Willoughby, that no feast could be
complete without it, v. 206 -- of the toucan, tender and nourishing, v. 246 --
of young herons, in particular estimation in France, v. 398 -- of the bittern,
greatly esteemed among the luxurious, vi. 5 -- of the puffin, formerly by the
church allowed on lenten days, vi. 104 -- of fishes, yields little nourishment,
vi. 182 -- question proposed to the learned concerning it, vi. 183 -- of the
young porpess, said to be as well tasted as veal, vi. 228 -- of the shark, is
hardly digestible by any but negroes, who are fond of it to distraction, vi.
247 -- of the turtle is become a branch of commerce, vi. 398 -- that of some
crabs is poisonous, vi. 376 -- of the great Mediterranean turtle sometimes
poisonous, vi. 394 Flies, torment the elephant unceasingly -- arts the ephant
tries to keep them off, iv. 266 -- the cornea so adapted by Puget, as to see
objects through it with a microscope -- strangeness of its representations --
does the fly see objects singly, as with one eye; or is every facet a complete
eye, exhibiting its object distinct from the rest, viii. 36, 37 -- common
water-fly swims on its back, vii. 359 -- dragon-fly, or the libella, vii. 316
-- the Spanish-fly, viii. 141. See Cantharides. Flintshire, in a lead mine
there, two great grinding teeth, and part of the tusk of an elephant,
discovered, at the depth of forty-two yards, iv. 282 Flounder, known to produce
in one season, above one million of eggs, vi. 178 Fluids, ascending in vessels
emptied of air -- rising in capillary tubes, and how this comes to pass, i. 192
Flumide, description of this fish, vi. 312 Flux of the sea, i. 250 -- not equal
in the Straight of Magellan, i. 259 Fly-catcher, bird of the sparrow kind, v.
317 Flying-fish, its description, vi. 314 -- chiefly sought by the dorado, vi.
341 Fly-trap, name of a flower, closing upon the flies that light upon it,
viii. 162 Foetus, the canal of communication through which the blood circulates
in the foetus, without going through the lungs, has been found open in some
bodies that have been dissected, vii. 58 Fongwhang, natives of China give a
fantastic description of this imaginary bird, v. 191 Fontenelle, a celebrated
writer, of a weak and delicate habit of body; the remarkable equality of his
temper lengthened out his life to above an hundred; nothing could vex or make
him uneasy, ii. 201 Food, man can live without it for seven days, ii. 132 -- a
Scotchman for the space of six weeks took no food at all, ii. 133 Foot, hares
have the sole of it furnished with hair, iv. 8. See Hare and Hair. Foramen
ovale, opening in the heart of the foetus, ii. 45 -- in the seal's heart, never
closes, iv. 171 Forbin, (chevalier) his account of baboons forcing women in
Siam, iv. 210 Forehead, narrow, liked by the Romans, ii. 76 Forest, generally
divided between monkies and serpents, iv. 221 Formica-leo, the lion-ant,
described, vii. 323 -- its habits, vii. 324 -- retreat, vii. 325 --
contrivances for catching other insects, vii. 326, 327 -- when attaining a
certain age, changes its form, vii. 328 -- description when become a large and
beautiful fly of the libellula kind, vii. 330 Form of hares made in places
where the color of the grass most resembles that of their skin; is open to the
south in winter, and to the north in summer, iv. 9 -- they sleep or repose in
them by day, iv. 7 Fossile, teeth of elephants often found in that state, iv.
282 -- bones found in Peru and Brazil, iv. 283 -- shells in the bowels of the
earth, not found in the ocean, vii. 15 Fouine, animal of the weasel kind, iii.
368 Fowls, large, do not rise easily, and why, v. 8 -- few water-fowls known to
breed in England, and why, v. 33 -- those of reddish plumage the ancients held
invaluable; the white, as unfit for domestic purposes, and fit as prey to
rapacious birds -- Aristotle thinks them less fruitful than the former, v. 162
-- sea-fowls ever sporting on formidable seacoasts, vi. 78 -- general
characteristics of water-fowls, vi. 45, 46 -- their food, vi. 48 -- the gull
kind, vi. 49 -- the penguin kind -- the goose kind, vi. 49, 50 -- water-fowls
properly of no climate, vi. 106 Foxes, their cubs born blind, like those of the
dog, iii. 331 -- the fox lives about twelve or fourteen years -- remarkable
instance of parental affection of a she-fox, iii. 330 -- all animals make war
upon the fox -- even the birds, iii. 331 -- refuses to engender with the dog --
brings forth fewer than the dog, and but once a year, iii. 329 -- the female
goes with young six weeks, and seldom stirs out while pregnant, iii. 330 --
various colors of them -- three varieties of this animal in Great Britain;
greyhound fox, mastiff-fox, and cur-fox -- round the pole they are of all
colors, iii. 332 -- jackall taken for the fox -- skin of the black fox most
esteemed, a single skin selling for forty or fifty crowns, iii. 333 -- in
Greenland do not change color at all, iii. 356 -- taken young, are gentle only
while cubs, growing older, discover their natural appetites of rapine and
cruelty, iii. 277 -- nothing eatable comes amiss to them, rats, mice, serpents,
toads, and lizards; insects, crabs, shrimps, and shellfish; carrots, wax, and
honey, even the hedgehog, iii. 327 -- often takes possession of the hole
quitted by the badger, or forces it from its retreat by art, iv. 328 -- hunt in
packs, iii. 276 -- chase of the fox, iii. 328 -- their offensive smell often
the cause of their death, iii. 324 -- way they find to subsist, iii. 325 to 327
-- name given by huntsmen to a fox of the second year -- old fox the name for
the third year, iii. 328 -- many animals in this country bred between a dog and
a fox, iii. 298 -- experiments prove neither the wolf nor the fox of the same
nature with the dog, each a species perfectly distinct, iii. 298 to 301 --
exactly resembles the wolf and the dog internally, iii. 323 -- description;
eyes, obliquely situated, like the wolf, iii. 324 Crost-fox, name of the
isatis, when turning white, iii. 341 Fox-tailed-monkey, of the sagoin kind, iv.
237 France, its kings of the first race had whiskers knotted and buttoned with
gold, ii. 97 -- under Francis I. peacocks served at the tables of the great,
not to be eaten but seen, v. 173 Fray, said when stags rub off the peel of
their horns against trees, iii. 114 Frederic, emperor of Germany, wrote a
treatise upon hawking, v. 118 Frederickshall, Charles XII. shot at the siege of
that fortress, ii. 208 Friezeland, great innundations happened in it, i. 278
Frischehaff, a lake where the sturgeon is found in greatest numbers, vi. 277
Frog, differences between it and the toad, in figure and conformation, vii. 74
-- the frog the best swimmer of all four-footed animals, vii. 75 -- its
description -- male or female have no external instruments of generation; the
anus serving for that purpose in both, vii. 75, 76 -- coupling of the common
brown frog -- experiments to discover how their impregnation is performed, vii.
76 to 79 -- the female not impregnated by the mouth, as conjectured, nor by the
thumbs, as imagined by Linnaeus, but by impersion of male seminal fluid upon
the eggs proceeding from the body -- how the female brings forth eggs, vii. 80
-- various changes in the eggs after impregnation by the male, vii. 81, 82 --
the animal in its perfect state, from feeding upon vegetables, becomes
carnivorous, lives upon worms and insects, and seeks for food upon land --
myriads seen on such occasions, have been fancied to be generated in the
clouds, and showered down on earth, vii. 83, 84 -- their habitudes and food,
vii. 84 -- differences of sexes not perceiveable, until their fourth year; do
not begin to propagate till that period, vii. 84, 85 -- live about twelve
years, vii. 85 -- a German surgeon kept one eight years in a glass covered with
a net, fed it often but sparingly -- instances of tenaciousness of life, vii.
86 -- the male only croaks -- large water-frog's note as loud as the bellowing
of a bull; and heard at three miles distance -- times of their croaking -- no
weather-glass so true in foretelling changes, vii. 87 -- adhere to the backs of
fishes, vii. 88 -- story of Walton to this purpose, vii. 89 -- dry weather
hurtful to frogs, vii. 88 -- designedly introduced into Ireland before the
Norway rat, iv. 66 -- the rat put a stop to their increase; and the frog is
almost extinct in that kingdom, iv. 67. See Fishing-frog. Frost, dry, augments
evaporation, i. 371 Frost-smoke, fogs near the pole form halos, or luminous
circles, i. 386, 387 Froth-worm, its description, vii. 358 Fumes of hot iron,
copper, or other metal, blown into the place where an animal is confined,
instantly destroys it, i. 319 Fur, the colder the country, the larger and the
warmer the fur -- instances of it, ii. 329 -- of the white fox not esteemed,
and why, iii. 333 -- the isatis of no value, unless killed in winter, iii. 341
-- the ermine the most valuable of any, iii. 354 -- no easy matter to account
for warmth of furs of Northern quadrupeds, or how they come to have such
abundant covering -- particulars on this subject, iii. 355 -- white weasel,
found in Great Britain, of no value, iii. 358 -- ermine, in every country,
changes by time, iii. 359 -- of the polecat in less estimation than some of
inferior kinds, iii. 366 -- of the yellow-breasted martin more valuable and
beautiful than the white, iii. 368 -- different colors of the sable, iii. 374
-- of the genet valuable, iii. 388 -- of the glutton has the most beautiful
luster, and is preferred to all except the Siberian sable, iii. 403 -- of the
hare forms a considerable article in the hat manufacture, iv. 13 -- of the
cricetus, or German rat, very valuable, iv. 84 -- inside down of the vulture's
wing makes a warm and comfortable kind of fur, v. 109 -- of the civet,
impregnated with the perfume, iii. 392
G.
Gadfly, formidable in Lapland -- brings on an incurable disorder upon the
reindeer -- precautions used against them, iii. 157 Gadus, the cod-fish, its
description, vi. 312 Gaganda, island of Ethiopia, parrots found there by the
Romans, v. 284 Galam, a place nine hundred miles up the Sengal, taken from the
French, i. 212 Galen asserts the eggs of hens and pheasants good to be eaten,
those of geese and ostriches worst of all, v. 63 Galinassos, Spanish name of
vultures in America, v. 113 Gall, the deer kind have none, iii. 94 -- of the
shammoy held useful to strengthen the sight, iii. 69 Gall-nuts, description of
the insect forming and residing in them, and its transformations, viii. 148
Galley-fish, its description, vi. 293 -- its legs adhesive -- common in
America, perpetually floating; no efforts made to hurt can make it sink --
never perceived to move on shore, so strongly adhering to whatever substances
applied, vi. 294 -- the smallest quantity of slimy substance from its legs
burns the skin like hot oil -- the shore covered with them, a forerunner of a
storm, vi. 295 Gally-worm, its difference from the scolopendra, vii. 303 Game,
sanguinary laws to preserve it, iii. 110 Ganges, a river visited annually by a
hundred thousand pilgrims, who pay their devotions to it as to God, i. 211 --
in its course receives twenty rivers, i. 217 Gannet, the soland goose, its
description -- subsists upon fish -- places abounding with them, vi. 71, 72 --
manner of preserving them and their eggs, in the island of St. Kilda;
twenty-three thousand of this kind of young birds consumed annually there -- a
bird of passage -- its migrations; never comes near the land, vi. 73 -- where
seen, it announces the arrival of herrings -- exceeds the cormorant in
quickness of sight -- method of taking its prey, -- manner of taking them at
sea, vi. 74 -- number of their eggs -- the young counted a great dainty, and
sold very dear, vi. 75 Garter-fish, the lipidopus, its description, vi. 312,
313 Gasterosteus, or the stickleback, description of this fish, vi. 309
Gazelles, neither goat nor deer -- partake of both natures, iii. 70 -- they
form a distinct kind, iii. 71 -- their description, iii. 70, 71, 72 -- of all
animals it has the most beautiful eye -- eastern poets compare the eyes of
their mistresses to those of the gazelle, iii. 72 -- Buffon makes but twelve
varieties -- their names and descriptions, iii. 73 to 80 -- comparing them
together, we find but slight distinctions, iii. 83 -- are inhabitants of the
warmer climates -- no animals, but of the winged kind, can overtake them -- are
pursued by falcons; and this hunting is a principal amusement among the great
in the East, iii. 84 -- also hunted with the ounce, iii. 85 -- another way of
taking them, iii. 86 -- keep in solitary and inaccessible places, iii. 87 --
the bubalus, more properly one of Africa, iii. 149 -- the most usual prey for
the lion in deserts and forests, iii. 223 -- the prey of the panther, iii. 260
-- pursued by the jackall, makes toward houses and towns, iii. 337 Gekko, a
kind of salamander, vii. 141 Generation, most complete where fewest animals are
produced, ii. 48 -- late discovery, that male fishes have two organs of
generation, vi. 179 -- all animals of the snail kind are hermaphrodites; each
containing the instruments of generation double, vii. 30 -- these organs in the
muscle, vii. 42 -- male or female of frogs have no external instruments for
that use, vii. 76 Gennette, its odor more faint than civet -- description of
this animal -- resembles the martin, more easily tamed; Bellonius has seen them
at Constantinople tame as cats -- glands open differently from others of its
kind, iii. 386, 387 -- called the cat of Constantinople -- never found in
mountains, nor dry places -- its fur valuable -- species not much diffused --
countries where it is found -- the most beautiful, cleanly, and industrious
animal -- keeps a house free from mice and rats by its smell, iii. 388
Gennette, of the province of Andalusia the best, ii. 357 Georgians, their
description, ii. 230 Gerbua, has four feet, uses only the hinder in running or
resting, iv. 349 -- the swiftest creature in the world -- description --
countries where found -- live upon vegetables, and burrow like rabbits, iv.
349, 350 -- its habits, iv. 351 Gerenda, a serpent to which the natives of
Calicut and those of the Mozambique coast pay divine honors, vii. 224 Germany,
the meanest peasant kills a cow for his table, salts and hangs it up, and
preserves it as a delicacy all the year round, iii. 9 Gesner minutely describes
a variety of mice-traps, iv. 74 -- places bats among birds, iv. 134 Giant, in
England, as late as king James I. the court had one, ii. 251 Giants,
probability of the race affirmed, possibility of their existence denied --
Grew's opinion, ii. 258, 259 -- Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese, first
discovered a race of such people, toward the extreme coast of South America,
ii. 259 -- assent to the existence of this gigantic race of mankind, ii. 262 --
travelers confirm it, ii. 261 -- seen here, have the same defects of
understanding as dwarfs -- are heavy, phlegmatic, stupid, and inclined to
sadness, ii. 263 Gibbon, the long-armed ape, its description, iv. 206 Gills,
their free play prevented, the animal falls into convulsions and dies, vi. 170
Gilthead, called dolphin by sailors -- its description, vi. 305 Gimerro,
imagined a breed between an ass and a bull, ii. 386 Glands, furnish the fetid
substance in animals of the weasel kind, iii. 352 -- of the genett open
differently from others, iii. 387 -- unctuous in birds to preserve their
feathers, v. 4 -- salivary in the gullet and crop of birds, v. 15 Glass, a
looking-glass held to the mouth of a person supposed dead, an uncertain
experiment for determining latent life, ii. 209 Glitters, little impressions so
called in the heads of stags, iii. 114 Globe of fire rising from the side of
the mountain Pichinca, i. 381 -- a great one seen at Bononia, in Italy, in the
year 1676 -- past westward at a rate of a hundred and sixty miles in a minute
-- could not be less than a mile long, and half a mile broad, i. 382 Globe of
glass, filled with water, assumes successively all the colors of the rainbow,
i. 385 Gloucester, its corporation had an old custom annually to present the
king with a lamprey pie, vi. 273 Glowworm, male and female of this species
differ entirely from each other, viii. 140 -- how and in what manner in which
light sent forth by the glowworm is produced, hitherto inexplicable -- the
light continues to grow paler, and at last is totally extinct, if the worm be
kept for some time, viii. 141 Glue, made of the horns of the reindeer, iii.
167 -- Mr. Jackson found out a method of making glue to answer the purposes of
isinglass, vi. 283 Glutton, the most dangerous, and most successful persecutor
of the reindeer, iii. 169 -- its manner of killing that deer, iii. 170 --
belongs to the weasel kind -- there is no precise description of it; some
resembling it to a badger, some to a fox, others to a hyaena -- one brought
alive from Siberia was three feet long, and about a foot and an half high, iii.
395 -- so called from its voracious appetite -- countries where found -- called
carcajou in North America -- general description -- Ray and others doubt of its
existence, iii. 396 -- takes its prey by surprise, and in what manner -- darts
down from branches of trees upon the elk, or the reindeer, sticks its claws
between their shoulders, and remains there firm, eating their necks, and
digging to the great blood vessels that lie on that part, iii. 397 to 399 --
amasing quantity one of these animals can eat at a time; that seen by Mr.
Klein, without exercise or air, taken from its native climate, and enjoying but
indifferent health, eat thirteen pounds of flesh every day, and was not
satisfied, iii. 399 -- it continues eating and sleeping till its prey, bones
and all, be devoured -- prefers putrid flesh to that newly killed -- it is so
slow that any quadruped can escape it, except the beaver -- pursues it upon
land; but the beaver taking water, the glutton has no chance to succeed, iii.
400 -- called the vulture of the quadrupeds -- in what manner it makes up by
stratagem the defects of nature, iii. 401 -- the female goes with young four
months, and brings forth two or three, iii. 402 -- the male and female equally
resolute in defense of their young -- is difficult to be skinned, iii. 403 --
does not fear man, iii. 402 is a solitary animal, and never in company than --
with its female; couples in the midst of winter -- the flesh not fit to be
eaten -- the fur has the most beautiful luster, and preferred to all, except
the Siberian fox, or the sable, iii. 402, 403 Gnats, in Lapland, fill the air
like clouds of dust -- are chiefly enemies to the reindeer -- remedies used
against them, iii. 156 -- proceed from a little worm, usually seen at the
bottom of standing waters -- curious manner in which the eggs are laid -- in
their egg state it resembles a buoy, fixed by an anchor, viii. 152 -- different
states of the insect -- in its last transformation, divested of a second skin;
in the next it resigns its eyes, its antennae, and its tail; and seems to
expire; from the spoils of the amphibious animal appears a little winged
insect, whose structure is an object of admiration, viii. 153 -- description of
this insect, and of its trunk, justly deemed one of nature's masterpieces --
implement with which the gnat performs its work in summer, viii. 154, 155 --
places where it spends the winter -- the little brood so numerous, that the
water is tinged with the color of the species, viii. 155 -- some gnats
oviparous, others viviparous, and come forth in a perfect form; some are males,
and unite with the female; some are females, requiring the male; others are of
neither sex, and produce young, without copulation, -- at the sixth generation
their propagation stops, the gnat no longer reproduces its likeness, but
requires the male to renew its fecundity, viii. 156, 157 -- produced in
multitudes beyond expression in America; and found of all sizes, from six
inches long, to a minuteness beyond the perception of the common eye -- native
Indians, anointed with oil, sleep in cottages covered with thousands of gnats,
and have not their slumbers interrupted by these cruel devourers, viii. 157
Goat, its eyes are gray, ii. 83 -- from Europe imported into South America,
soon degenerates; as it grows less, it becomes more prolific -- imported to the
African coast, it seems to improve, ii. 334 -- African wild goat of Grimmius,
fourth anomalous of the kind -- its description, iii. 81, 82 -- goat and sheep
propagate together; and may be considered as of one family -- the buck goat
produces with the ewe an animal, in two or three generations returning to the
sheep, and retaining no marks of its ancient progenitor, iii. 35 -- more fitted
for a life of savage liberty than the sheep, iii. 52 -- is not easily confined
to its flock, but chooses its own pasture, and loves to stray from the rest, --
delights in climbing precipices -- is capricious and vagrant -- is not
terrified at storms, or incommoded by rain; immoderate cold affects it, and
produces a vertigo, to which this animal is subject, iii. 53, 54 -- proof of
its being naturally the friend of man, and that it seldom resumes its forest
wildness, when once reduced into the state of servitude, iii. 54 -- in some
places they bear twice a year, iii. 55 -- in warmer climates generally bring
forth three, four, and five at once, iii. 54, 55 -- milk of goats medicinal;
not apt to curdle in the stomach, iii. 55 -- flesh of the goat, properly
prepared, ranked by some not inferior to venison, iii. 56 -- is never so good
and so sweet, in our climate, as mutton, iii. 57 -- no man can attend above
fifty goats at a time, iii. 56 -- flesh of the goat found to improve between
the tropics -- remarkable varieties in this kind; that of Natolia, by Mr.
Buffon called goat of Angora -- its description, iii. 57 -- the Assyrian goat
of Gesner -- chiefly kept about Aleppo -- little goat of America, the size of a
kid -- has hair as long as the ordinary breed, iii. 58 -- Juda goat, not larger
than a hare -- common in Guinea, Angola, and the coast of Africa -- blue goat
at the Cape of Good Hope -- its description, iii. 59 -- Bezoar goat, the pasan,
found in the mountains of Egypt, etc. iii. 74 -- in Syria remarkable for their
fine, glossy, long, soft hair, iii. 212 -- goats eat four hundred and
forty-nine plants, and reject a hundred and twenty-six, iii. 176 -- boundaries
between the goat and deer-kind difficult to fix, iii. 70, 83 Goat-sucker, a
nocturnal swallow -- description and habits, v. 346 Gobius, the gudgeon,
description of this fish, vi. 307 Godignus, in his history of Abyssinia,
exaggerates the effects of the shock of the torpedo, to an incredible degree,
vi. 266 Godwit, its dimensions, vi. 23 -- a bird of passage, vi. 28 Goiam,
kingdom, where the Nile takes its rise, i. 213 Gold, never contracts rust, and
why, -- except in places where much salt is used, i. 313 Golden-eye, bird of
the duck-kind, vi. 130 Goldfinch, bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 314, 315 --
learns a song from the nightingale, v. 345 Goose, marks of the goose-kind, vi.
108 -- food, vi. 110 -- abstained from by the ancients as indigestible, vi. 111
-- one known to live an hundred years, vi. 119 -- marks of the tame and wild
sort -- wild supposed to breed in the northern parts of Europe, vi. 121 --
flight regularly arranged, vi. 122 Brent-goose, vi. 123 -- most harmless, but
for their young pursue dogs and men, vi. 124 -- use of its feathers in beds
unknown in countries of the Levant and Asia -- feathers a considerable article
of commerce -- different qualities of them, vi. 125 -- the best method of
curing them, vi. 126 Soland-goose, described, vi. 71. See Gannet. Gooseander, a
round-billed water fowl, its description -- feeds upon fish, vi. 106, 107
Gordian, the emperor, wrote a poem upon the halcyon, of which are no remains,
vi. 144 Goss-hawk, of the baser race of hawks, v. 119 -- taught to fly at game,
little obtained from its efforts, v. 131 Gottenburgh, in Sweden, a cataract
near it, i. 222 Gouan, a learned Frenchman, his system deserves applause for
more than its novelty -- how followed in arranging the spinous class of fishes,
vi. 302 to 316 Graaf, his observations upon the progress and increase of
animals in the womb, ii. 36, et seq. Grampus, fierce and desperate in defense
of its young -- remarkable instance, vi. 188 -- description, and habits, vi.
222 Grasshopper, a ruminating insect, or seemingly so, iii. 6 -- differences
between ours and the cicada of the ancients, vii. 331 -- great varieties of
this animal in shape and color, vii. 332 -- description of the little
grasshopper, that breeds plentifully in meadows, and continues chirping through
the summer -- the male of this tribe only vocal, vii. 332 to 334 -- how their
fecundation is performed -- the male or female never survive the winter --
their eggs, vii. 334, 335 -- from first appearing, possessed of wings, vii. 337
-- how it gets rid of the outer skin, vii. 338 -- their food, vii. 339 --
places where they deposit their eggs, vii. 340 Grave, the greatest care
recommended not to commit those dearest to us to the grave, before real signs
of certain death be ascertained, ii. 210 Greatah, river in Yorkshire running
under ground, and rising again, i. 224 Grebe, description of the bird --
residence, and habits, vi. 40 -- perpetually diving, and very difficult to be
shot -- never seen on land -- chiefly sought for the skin of its breast, and
why -- in breeding-time their breasts are bare, vi. 41 Greenfinch, bird of the
sparrow-kind, v. 315, 317 Greenland, Krantz's account of the formation of
ice-mountains in that country, i. 246 -- aurora borealis, its appearance almost
constant in winter -- the inhabitants not entirely forsaken in the midst of
their tedious night; this aurora affording them light for the purposes of
existence, i. 387 -- they live mostly upon seals -- their number daily
diminishing, and why, iv. 182 Greenlanders described, ii. 213 -- customary
among them to turn Europeans into ridicule, ii. 216 -- a quiet, or a modest
stranger, they deem almost as well bred as a Greenlander, ii. 217 Grew, his
opinion concerning dwarfs and giants, ii. 258 Greyhound-kind, iii. 284 --
greyhound-fox, iii. 332 Gris, the petit gris Mr. Buffon's name for the gray
Virginian squirrel, iv. 25 Grossbeak, bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 315 Grotto
of Antiparos, in the Archipelago, the most remarkable subterraneous cavern now
known, i. 67 -- description, i. 67 to 71 Grotto del Cane, near Naples,
situation and description -- noxious effects, i. 84, 85 Grous, chiefly found in
heathy mountains and piny forests, v. 199 Growth of the child less every year,
till the time of puberty, when it starts up of a sudden, ii. 60 -- growth of
the mind in children corresponds with that of the body, and why, ii. 61 -- of
some young people ceases at fourteen, or fifteen; of others continues till two
or three and twenty, ii. 79 -- of fishes irregular and tardy, vi. 339, 340
Guadalquiver, river in Spain buried in the sands, i. 224 Guanacoes, a kind of
camel in America, iv. 317 Guanches, ancient inhabitants of the island of
Teneriff -- art of embalming still preserved among them, when the Spaniards
conquered the island, ii. 272 Guariba, Brasilian guariba, or warine, the
largest of the monkey kind in America, described, iv. 236 Guayaquil, river in
South America, i. 147 Gudgeon, fresh water sort has no bladder, vi. 174 --
description of that fish, vi. 307 Guiba, animal resembling the gazelle -- its
description, iii. 81 Guillemot, bird of the smaller tribe of the penguin kind,
vi. 99 Guinea, the natives kill numbers of hares at a time, and in what manner,
iv. 14 Guinea-ass, larger and more beautiful than the horse, ii. 385
Guinea-hen, described, v. 192 Guinea-horse, remarkable sports with it among the
grandees of that country, ii. 363 Guinea-pig, by Brisson placed among the
rabbit-kind -- native of the warmer climates -- rendered domestic, and now
become common every where -- its description, iv. 55, 56 -- in some places a
principal favorite; often displacing the lap-dog, iv. 55 -- manner of living
among us, iv. 57 -- most helpless and inoffensive, scarce possessed of any
courage, iv. 56 -- their animosity exerted against each other; often fight
obstinately, and the stronger destroys the weaker -- no natural instinct, the
female sees her young destroyed without attempting to protect them -- suffer
themselves to be devoured by cats, iv. 57 -- fed upon recent vegetables, they
seldom drink -- sometimes gnaw clothes, paper, or other things of the kind --
drink by lapping -- confined in a room, seldom cross the floor, but keep along
the wall -- never move abreast together -- chiefly seek the most intricate
retreats, and venture out only when all interruption is removed, like the
rabbits, iv. 58 -- in cold weather more active -- a very cleanly animal --
their place must be regularly cleaned, and a new bed of hay provided for them
once a week -- the young falling into the dirt, or other ways discomposed, the
female takes an aversion to them, and never permits them to visit her more --
her employment, and that of the male, consists in smoothing their skins,
disposing their hair, and improving its gloss -- and take this office by turns
-- do the same to their young, and bite them when refractory -- reared without
the any artificial heat, iv. 59 -- no keeping them from fire in winter, if once
permitted to approach it -- manner of sleeping -- the male and the female watch
one another by turns -- generally capable of coupling at six weeks old -- time
of their gestation -- the female brings forth from three to five at a time; not
without pain, iv. 60 -- the female admits the male the very day she has brought
forth, and again becomes pregnant -- suckles her young about twelve or fifteen
days, and suffers the young of others, though older, to drain her, to the
disadvantage of her own -- produced with eyes open, and in twelve hours, equal
to the dam in agility -- capable of feeding upon vegetables from the beginning
-- their disputes for the warmest place, or most agreeable food -- manner of
fighting, iv. 61 -- flesh indifferent food -- difficultly tamed; suffer no
approaches but of the person who breeds them -- manner of eating -- drink
seldom, and make water often -- grunt like a young pig -- appear to chew the
cud, iv. 62 Guinea-sheep, have a kind of dewlap under the chin -- breed with
other sheep, therefore not animals of another kind, iii. 48 Guiratemga, name
given by the natives of Brasil, to the little wood-pecker, v. 255 Gull, places
where found in plenty -- their food, vi. 77 Gulls, various ways of imposing
upon each other, vi. 80 -- contests in breeding -- residence, with their nests
and eggs, vi. 81, 82 -- their flesh -- method of taking them in the Feroe
islands, vi. 82, and seq. -- anciently a law in Norway concerning those who
died in taking them, vi. 82 Gulf, the Persian -- deadly wind along its coasts,
i. 358 -- chief pearl-fishery carried on there, vii. 56 -- Gulf of Pluto, a
dreadful cavern, i. 61 Gun, wind-gun, instrument determining the elasticity of
the air -- a ball from it pierces a thick board, i. 307 -- great guns, in
climates near the equator, with every precaution, after some years become
useless, and why, i. 313 Gunpowder, readily fires with a spark, not with the
flame, i. 83 -- will not go off in an exhausted receiver; a train of gunpowder
laid, one part in open air, the other part in vacuo, the latter will remain
untouched, i. 333 Gurnard, description of this fish, vi. 309 Gustavus Adolphus
attempted in vain to form a regiment of Laplanders, ii. 215 Guts, most birds
have two blind guts, which in quadrupeds are found single, v. 16 Gymnotus, the
carapo, description of this fish, vi. 311 Gyr-falcon, exceeds all others in
largeness of size -- its description, v. 120 Gyrle, name given by hunters to
the roe-buck, the second year, iii. 136
H.
Habit contracted during life, to make out pleasures and pains in extremes,
though either can hardly be suffered or enjoyed to the utmost, ii. 208 Haddock,
a periodical shoal appeared on the Yorkshire coasts, on December 10, 1766, and
exactly on the same day in the following year, vi. 326 Haemorrhois, a kind of
serpent, vii. 215 Hail, Cartesians say, is a frozen cloud half melted and
frozen again in its descent, i. 373 -- the most injurious meteor known in our
climate, i. 374 -- hailstones fourteen inches round -- struck out an eye of a
young man, and killed him on the spot, i. 375 -- a dreadful shower recorded by
Mezeray, fell in 1510; the hailstones were of a blueish color, and some
weighed an hundred pounds -- the fishes were great sufferers in that general
calamity, i. 376 Hair of the Roman ladies praised for the redness of its shade,
ii. 76 -- found most different in different climates -- marks the country and
the disposition of the man -- by the ancients held a sort of excrement,
produced like the nails, ii. 86 -- according to moderns, every hair lives,
receives nutriment, fills, and distends, like other parts of the body -- takes
color from the juices flowing through it -- each, viewed with a microscope,
consists of five or six lesser, wrapped up in one common covering, and sends
forth branches at the joints -- suitable to the size or shape of the pore
through which it issues -- bulbous at the root, and its end resembles a brush
-- length and strength of hair a mark of a good constitution, ii. 88 --
Americans and the Asiatics have it thick, black, strait, and shining --
inhabitants of the torrid climates of Africa have it black, short, and woolly
-- the people of Scandinavia have it red, long, and curled, ii. 87, 88 --
opinion that every man has dispositions resembling those of the inhabitants of
countries he resembles in the color and nature of his hair -- curled hair
among us a beauty -- the Greeks have taken one of their national distinctions
from the length and straitness of the hair, ii. 88 -- Americans take the
greatest pains in cutting their hair -- variety in customs and manner of
cutting hair, ii. 95, 96, 97 -- trade of the inhabitants of Angora with the
hair of animals of their country -- camlet and other stuffs made of it, iii. 58
-- hair of the cat rubbed in the dark sends forth shining sparks, iii. 207 --
Syria and Persia noted for long soft hair to the animals bred in them, iii. 212
-- each hair of the lynx is of three different colors, iii. 257 -- of the
black fox so disposed as impossible to tell which way the grain lies, iii. 333
-- coats of hair seem to thicken at the approach of winter -- among quadrupeds,
as among men, thin spare diet produces hair, iii. 355 -- on the soles of the
feet, and on the inside of the mouths of hares, iv. 8 Halcyon, rapacious
waterfowl, vi. 142. See King fisher. Halley, Dr. his plausible theory to
explain the invariable motion of the winds, i. 343 Hallontide, in 1580, an army
of mice so overrun the marshes near Southminster, that they eat up the grass
to the roots, v. 146 Halos, oftener seen in countries near the poles, than any
other part of the earth, i. 387 Hammer, the yellow, bird of the sparrow-kind,
v. 315, 317 Hamster, the cricetus or German rat of Mr. Buffon, iv. 81 Hand
sufficient to vindicate the dominion of man over other animals, a poor
assertion, iv. 249 -- a man, without hands or legs, converts his stumps to most
convenient purposes, and performs astonishing feats of dexterity, iv. 250, 251
Harbor of a stag, in covert or thicket, iii. 114 Hare, a gregarious animal,
where it has no enemies but beasts of the forest, iii. 2 -- the swiftest animal
for the time it continues to run, iv. 1 -- animals of the hare-kind inoffensive
and timorous -- placed by Pyerius among those that chew the cud -- whether or
not, certainly the lips continually move sleeping or waking -- that kind
remarkably salacious, and furnished by nature with ampler powers than others
for propagation, iv. 3 -- if not thinned by constant depredations, would
overrun the earth, of these the hare the largest and most timorous -- has
large prominent eyes placed backwards to see behind as it runs -- these never
closed; it sleeps with them open -- the ears moveable, and capable of direction
to every quarter -- muscles of its body strong and without fat -- hinder feet
longer than the fore on account of speed, iv 4 -- persecuted by dogs, cats,
weasels, and birds of prey -- in a state of engendering very early -- females
go with young thirty days, and bring forth three or four at a time, iv. 5 --
has young of different ages in her womb together -- though already impregnated,
she admits the male, and receives a second impregnation -- reason of this
extraordinary circumstance -- the young brought forth with their eyes open --
the dam suckles them twenty days, iv. 6 -- food they are fond of -- sleep or
repose in their form by day, and live only by night -- the rutting season
begins in February -- the male pursues and discovers the female by the sagacity
of its nose, iv. 7 -- the slightest breeze, or falling of a leaf, disturbs
their revels; they instantly fly off, each taking a separate way, -- are more
easily taken than the fox, a much slower animal than they, and why -- always
choose to run up hill, and why -- have the sole of the foot furnished with hair,
and seem the only animals with hair on the inside of the mouth -- live seven or
eight years, and come to perfection in one year -- females live longer, vi. 8
-- Mr. Buffon makes a doubt of it -- seldom heard to cry, except when seized or
wounded -- their cry nearly like the squalling of a child -- are easily tamed
-- though never so young, regain their native freedom at the first opportunity
-- have a good ear, and been taught to beat the drum, dance to measure, and go
through manual exercise -- make themselves a form where the color of the grass
resembles that of their skin, open to the south in winter, and to the north in
summer, iv. 9 -- sore hunted, will start a fresh hare and squat in its form --
some enter holes like the rabbit, by hunters termed going to vault, iv. 10 --
as it tires, treads heavier, and its scent is stronger -- young hares tread
heavier than old -- male makes doublings of greater compass than the female --
divided by hunters into mountain and measled hares, iv. 11 -- mode of
expression, the more you hunt, the more hares you shall have, and why -- what
animals persecute the hare -- its enemies so various, that it seldom reaches
the short term limited to it by nature, iv. 12 -- in countries near the north
pole, they become white, and are often in great troops of four or five hundred
-- their skins sold for less than seven shillings an hundred -- the fur known
to form a considerable article in the hat manufacture -- found also entirely
black, in much less quantity than the former -- some have been seen with horns,
but rarely -- those in hot countries smaller than ours -- those in the Milanese
the best in Europe -- scarce a country where not found, from the torrid zone to
the polar circle, iv. 13 -- natives of Guinea kill numbers at a time; in what
manner -- the Jews, ancient Britons, and Mahometans all considered it an
unclean animal, and religiously abstained from it, iv. 14 -- hare and rabbit
distinct kinds, refuse to mix with each other -- an instance -- Apicius shows
the manner of dressing a hare in true Roman taste, iv. 15 -- laws made for the
preservation of them, iv. 16 Harfang, or great Hudson's Bay owl, the largest of
the nocturnal tribe, v. 141 Harlequin, a kind of dog, iii. 286, 290 Harmony of
our planetary system, i. 4 Harold, afterward king of England, went on a most
important embassy into Normandy, and was drawn in bas-relief, with a bird on
his fist, and a dog under his arm, v. 118 Harp, the story of Arion's gathering
the dolphins about the ship, ii. 168 Harpies, that ancient idea taken from the
rousette, or the great bat of Madagascar, iv. 141. Harrier, hound, and beagle,
all of the same kind, iii. 283, 284 -- a dog of the generous kind, iii. 286
Heart, name of the stag the sixth year, iii. 113 Hartshorn and musk, the only
medicines of reputation of several procurable from quadrupeds, iii. 69 Harvey,
his opinion about the formation of the incipient animal -- altercations against
his system, ii. 17 Hatching, nothing exceeds the patience of birds hatching, v.
26 -- Mr. Addison's observations to this purpose, v. 27 -- the emu very
peculiar in the hatching of its young, v. 66 -- the crocodile's eggs hatched in
the sand, vii. 134, 135 Hatfield, in Yorkshire, description of one of those
spouts called typhons, observed there in 1687, i. 394 Havannah, in the
fortunate expedition which gave us that place, the climate left not a fifth
part of the army survivors of the victory, i. 323 Hawfinch, a bird of the
sparrow-kind, v. 317 Hawk-kind, distinctive marks from other carnivorous birds,
v. 85 -- in old paintings, the criterion of nobility; no person of rank stirred
out without his hawk on his hand -- Harold, afterward king of England, going
on an important embassy into Normandy, is drawn in an old bas-relief, embarking
with an hawk on his fist, and a dog under his arm -- in those days, it was
sufficient for noblemen's sons to wind the horn and carry the hawk fair -- this
diversion in such high esteem among the great all over Europe, that Frederic,
emperor of Germany, wrote a treatise upon hawking, v. 118 -- this amusement now
much given over in this kingdom, and why, v. 117 -- in the reign of James I.
sir Thomas Monson gave a thousand pounds for a cast of hawks -- in the reign of
Edward III. it was made felony to steal a hawk, v. 118 -- to take its eggs was
punished by imprisonment for a year and a day, with a fine at the king's
pleasure -- in the reign of Elizabeth, the imprisonment reduced to three
months, the offender to lie in prison till he got security for his good
behavior during seven years -- in earlier times, the art of gunning was but
little used, and the hawk was then valuable for its affording diversion and
procuring delicacies for the table not otherwise to be obtained, v. 119 --
distinctive marks of the tribe called the long-winged hawks -- their names and
descriptions -- have attachment to their feeder, and docility the baser race
are strangers to, v. 119 to 121 -- names of hawks of the baser race -- those of
the generous breed remarkable for courage, swiftness, and docility, in obeying
the commands and the signs of their master, v. 122 -- account of the manner of
training a hawk, v. 124 -- falconers had a language peculiar, in which they
conversed and wrote, v. 123 -- hawk destroys mice, iv. 73 -- perceives a lark
at a distance which neither men nor dogs could spy, v. 10 Sparrow-hawk pursues
the thrush and the linnet, v. 81 -- said to be the boldest and best of all
others for the chase, v. 131 Goss-hawk and sparrow-hawk unfit for training --
taught to fly at game but little obtained from them, v. 130, 131 Hawkins,
becalmed about the islands of Azores for six months, saw the sea replenished
with gellies, and forms of serpents, adders, and snakes, in a wonderful manner,
i. 239 Head of man externally and internally different from that of all other
animals, the monkey-kind excepted, ii. 101 -- whence originally the flat heads
of the American Indians, ii. 239 -- of quadrupeds different from each other,
but adapted to their several ways of living, and how, ii. 314 -- in all birds,
except nocturnal, the head smaller and less proportioned to the body than in
quadrupeds, v. 9 -- of the great Greenland whale makes a third of its bulk, vi.
194 Hearing, extreme delicacy of this sense in birds, v. 11 -- that sense in
whales, vi. 196 Hearse, name of the female of the stag, the second year, iii.
113 Heart, a broken heart, in common language, a disorder caused by hunger, ii.
129 Heat, Boerhaave considered it so prejudicial to health, that he never went
near a fire, i. 325 -- of the blood in man and other animals about thirty
degrees above congelation -- in the marmout, and other animals which sleep the
winter, it is not above ten, iv. 45 Hecla, the bellowings of that volcano,
believed by the inhabitants of Iceland to be the cries of the damned, i. 88
Hedgehog, the most harmless of animals, iv. 100 -- its description, iv. 101 --
usual appearance upon the approach of danger, iv. 102 -- to disgust its enemy
from pursuit, sheds its urine, the smell of which is sufficient to send him off
-- sleeps by day, and ventures out by night -- places where found -- its food
-- does not suck cattle, iv. 103 -- are not hurtful in gardens or orchards --
the spines so disposed, that no fruit will stick upon them -- appears
serviceable in ridding the fields of insects and worms -- Mr. Buffon accuses it
of tricks, of which, from its form and habits, one would not be led to suspect
it, iv. 104 -- he kept males and females together, but they never coupled --
time of their coupling -- sleep during winter, but do not lay up provisions for
that season -- at no time eat much, and remain long without food -- blood cold,
and their flesh not good for food -- their skins converted to no use, except to
muzzle calves from sucking, iv. 105 -- destroyed and devoured by the fox -- in
what manner, iii. 327, iv. 121 Hedgehog of the sea, a cartilaginous fish of
the sea-orb kind, vi. 291 Hedge-sparrow, a slender-billed bird, v. 314 Height,
Maximin, the emperor, above nine feet in stature, ii. 118 Heliogabalus, noted
for having the brains of six hundred ostriches dressed in one dish, v. 59
Hellebore, a quantity of the black sort pounded carelessly purged several
persons who were present, and the operator strongly, i. 326 St. Helmo's fire,
or the mariner's light, i. 380 Helmont, his experiment to show all things made
of water, i. 166 Hemisphere, half illuminated by northern lights, i. 377
Hemlock eat by the horse without injury, ii. 341 Hemuse, name hunters give the
roebuck the third year, iii. 136 Hen, in the Museum at Brussels, a creature
covered with feathers and hair, said to be bred between a rabbit and a hen, iv.
15 Hen of the common sort, moderately fed, lays above a hundred eggs from
spring to autumn, v. 30 -- after three years, become effete and barren --
clutches one brood of chickens in a season -- instances of two, very rare --
number of eggs of a domestic hen in the year above two hundred, being well fed,
supplied with water, and at liberty -- trodden by the cock or not, she
continues to lay -- eggs of this kind never by hatching produce living animals
-- her nest made without care, v. 165 -- clucking season artificially
protracted, and entirely removed, in what manner -- left to herself, would
seldom lay above twenty eggs without attempting to hatch them -- as she lays,
her eggs being removed, she continues to increase the number -- in the wild
state, seldom lays above fifteen eggs -- particularities of incubation, v. 166,
167 -- affection and pride after producing chickens, -- every invading animal
she boldly attacks, the horse, the hog, or the mastiff -- marching before her
little troop, by a variety of notes calls her train to their food, or warns
them of danger, 167 -- instance of the brood running for security into a hedge,
while the hen stood boldly forth and faced a fox that came for plunder, v. 168
-- artificial method of hatching chicken in stoves practiced at Grand Cairo, or
in a laboratory with graduated heat, effected with woollen hens by Mr. Reaumur
-- by these contrivances, from a hen naturally producing twelve chickens in the
year, are obtained artificially above two hundred, v. 168, 169 -- common hen
supplies the place of the hen-pheasant, when refusing to hatch her eggs, and
performs the task with perseverance and success, v. 188 Guinea hen, or Barbary
hen, described, v. 192 Water-hen described, vi. 36 -- residence and food, vi.
37 -- nest and habits, vi. 38 Henry IV. king of Denmark, desirous of trying the
skill of a musician, who boasted he could excite men to madness, submitted to
the operation, became mad, and killed four of his attendants, ii. 170
Herculaneum overwhelmed in that eruption of Vesusuvius in which Pliny the
Naturalist was suffocated -- its ruins lately discovered at sixty feet below
the surface, and forty below the bottom of the sea, i. 91 Hermaphrodites, such
are all animals of the snail kind, vii. 30 -- the bivalve tribe are so too --
they require no assistance from each other toward impregnation, vii. 41
Hermetical sealing a glass vessel, the meaning of it, i. 168 Heron, a
ruminating bird, iii. 5 -- the great heron, in former times, bred familiarly in
our marshes -- not now, and why, v. 33 -- anatomical distinction in which
herons differ from other birds -- of this tribe Brison has enumerated
forty-seven sorts, v. 392 -- excessively destructive and voracious -- ever have
lean and carrion bodies -- description of the common heron -- flies at the
approach of the sparrow-hawk, v. 393 -- commits the greatest devastations in
fresh waters -- a fish ever so large he will strike at, though unable to carry
it away, v. 394 -- one heron, says Willoughby, will destroy fifteen thousand
carp in half a year -- usual attitude, waiting for prey -- food in cold and
stormy seasons, v. 395 -- manner of fishing, v. 396 -- Willoughby's receipt for
taking him, v. 397 -- their nests, v. 398 -- never in flocks when they fish,
but making nests, they love each other's society, v. 397, 398 -- flesh of the
young esteemed in France -- method used to obtain them, v. 398 -- the young
once excluded, the old incessantly provide them with an amazing quantity of
fish, v. 399 -- instance of it -- by Mr. Keysler's account, this bird may
exceed sixty years -- recent instance of one taken in Holland, with a silver
plate to one leg, and an inscription, that it had been struck by the elector of
Cologne's hawks thirty-five years before, v. 400 -- they contract a consumptive
disposition, v. 396 Heron-hawking, a favorite diversion among our ancestors,
had laws enacted for the preservation of the species -- he who destroyed their
eggs was liable to a penalty of twenty shillings for each offense, v. 393
Herrera confirms the existence of giants, ii. 261 Herring, its description, vi.
314 -- of migrating fish, this and the pilchard take the most adventurous
voyages, vi. 326 -- places where the herrings are in greatest abundance --
numerous enemies met in their migrations, vi. 327, 328 -- in Chesepeak bay, the
shoals so great as to cover the shores, and become a nuisance, vi. 328 -- that
body upon our coasts, begins to appear off the Shetland isles in April;
forerunners of the grand shoal descending in June, and announced by the gannet,
gull, etc. vi. 329 -- fishermen take two thousand barrels at a single draught,
-- places of Europe where herrings are punctual in their visitations, vi. 330
-- doubts in every part of their migration -- first great bank for herrings was
along the Norway shore; before 1584, the number of ships from various parts of
Europe resorting thither, exceeded some thousands -- quantity of herrings then
assembled there, was such that a spear stuck in the water, as Olaus Magnus
asserts, would stand on end; soon after that period, they deserted the Norway
shores, and took up along the German coasts, vi. 331, 332 -- no cause assigned
for this seemingly capricious desertion -- their greatest colonies now in the
British channel, and upon the Irish shores, vi. 332 -- a herring suffered to
multiply unmolested, and undiminished for twenty years, would show a progeny
greater in bulk than ten such globes as that we live upon, vi. 335
Hertfordshire, a dreadful storm which happened in it, in 1697, described, i.
375 Hexagons, with Pappus, the most convenient figures in building -- cells of
bees are perfect hexagons, viii. 70 Hide of the elk, often known to turn a
musket-ball, iii. 147 Hiera, island in the Mediterranean, risen and formed by
subterraneous explosions, i. 126, 127 Hiero, king of Sicily, had a crown of
gold weighed hydrostatically by Archimedes, i. 190 Hind, or female of the stag,
has no horns -- time of gestation, and usual season of bringing forth -- hides
her young in obscure thickets, iii. 107 -- obliged to use all arts to conceal
them from the stag, the most dangerous of her pursuers -- how she defends her
young, iii. 108 -- the female stag still so called, the third year, iii 113 --
manner of knowing the track of a hind, iii. 115 -- inhabitants of Canada have
no other milk but that of the hind; and no other cheese but that made of it,
iii. 124 -- the hunters name for the roe-buck, the first year, iii. 136
Hippocampus, the sea horse, its description, vi. 289 Hippocrates, his opinion
about the formation of the incipient animal, ii. 16 Hippopotamos, its
dimensions, iv. 292 -- places where it resides -- its food -- swims with much
force, and remains at the bottom for thirty or forty minutes, iv. 393 -- it
commits dreadful havoc among the plantations, iv. 294 -- not afraid singly to
oppose the lion, iii. 225 -- method the Africans use to frighten it back to its
element -- inoffensive in its disposition, iv. 294 -- never attacks mariners in
their boats, unless inadvertently struck against, or otherwise disturbed, then
it would send them at once to the bottom -- instances of its great strength,
iv. 295 -- never goes beyond the mouth of fresh water rivers -- attacked on
shore, and incapable of vengeance upon a flying enemy, returns to the river,
and plunges in head foremost -- the negroes, apprised of its force, do not
engage it -- continues uncontrouled master of the river, all others fly its
approach, or become an easy prey -- moves slowly upon land -- seldom goes from
the river side, unless pressed by necessities of hunger, or of bringing forth
its young -- lives upon fish and vegetables; nanatives of Africa say it often
devours children, and other creatures surprised upon land, iv. 296 -- the young
are excellent eating, iv. 297 -- the female seldom produces above one at a
time; hearing the slightest noise, she dashes into the stream, and the young
one follows her with equal alacrity, iv. 296, 297 -- Dr. Pocock has seen their
flesh sold in shambles like beef; their breast thought as delicate eating as
veal -- this creature, once plenty at the mouth of the Nile, now wholly unknown
in Lower Egypt, and no where found but above the cataracts, iv. 297 Historian,
(natural) what his proper business, i. 7 -- going too much into speculation
certainly wrong, and why, i. 19 -- method his principal help, ii. 289 -- faults
of systematic writers, ii. 291, 292 History, (natural) of all other sciences
has the least danger of obscurity, and why, ii. 300 -- best set forth, as Mr.
Lock has observed, by drawings of animals, taken from life, ii. 307 -- rule in
natural history, that neither horns, color, fineness, or length of hair, or
position of ears make actual distinctions in the kinds, iii. 60 -- accounts of
fishes little entertaining; philosophers not studying their nature, but
employed in increasing their catalogues, vi. 154 -- Dampier has added more to
it than half the philosophers before him, vi. 397 -- one of the strangest
discoveries in all natural history, viii. 156 Hobby, bird of the generous breed
of hawks, for smaller game, daring larks, and stooping at quails, v. 122 Hogs,
animals of this kind resemble those of the horse as well as the cow kind, and
in what -- this kind partakes of the rapacious and the peaceful kinds, iii. 171
-- offend no animal of the forest, iii. 172 -- remarkable that none of this
kind ever shed their teeth, iii. 173 -- any animal dying in the forest, or so
wounded as to make no resistance, is the prey of the hog, who refuses no animal
food, however putrid, iii. 175 -- in a state of wildness, most delicate in the
choice of its vegetables, rejects a greater number than any other, iii. 176 --
they eat but seventy-two plants, and reject a hundred and seventy -- indelicacy
of this animal more in our apprehensions than in its nature, and why -- in
orchards of peach-trees in North America, reject the fruit that has lain a few
hours on the ground, and watch hours for a fresh wind-fall, iii. 177 -- have
had mice burrowing in their backs while fattening in the sty, without seeming
to perceive it -- scent the hounds at a distance -- by nature stupid, inactive,
and drowsy, has passions more active only when incited by venery, or when the
wind blows with vehemence, iii. 178 -- forsees the approach of bad weather --
much agitated on hearing any of its kind in distress -- have often gathered
round a dog that teazed them, and killed him upon the spot -- their various
diseases -- generally live, when permitted, to eighteen or twenty years; the
females produce to the age of fifteen -- in the wild state less prolific, iii.
179 Guinea hog, and that about Upsal described, iii. 181 Water-hog. See
Capihara. Hog of Bouro. See Babyrouessa. Hog of the isthmus of Darien,
described by Wafer, iii. 196 Hohanno, a river in Asia -- its course, i. 210 --
receives thirty-five lesser rivers, i. 217 Holland, a conquest from the sea,
and rescued from its bosom -- the surface of its earth below the level of the
bottom of the sea; upon approaching the coast, it is looked down upon from the
sea, as into a valley, is every day rising higher, and by what means -- those
parts which formerly admitted large men of war, are now too shallow to receive
ships of moderate burden, i. 276 Honey, from what part of the flower it is
extracted, viii. 75 -- two kinds of it -- which to be preferred, viii. 89 --
that gathered by the humble bees not so fine, nor so good as that of the common
bees, viii. 92 -- gathered by the black bees in the tropical climates, neither
so unpalatable, nor so surfeiting as ours -- produced by the bees at
Guadaloupe, never congeals, remains fluid, of the consistence of oil, with the
color of amber, viii. 90 -- the polecat and the martin feed upon honey, iii.
358, 366 Honeycomb, name of the second stomach of ruminating animals, iii. 3
Hoof, of the Persian mares so hard, that shoeing is unnecessary, ii. 355
Hooper, name of the wild swan, on account of the harshness of its voice, vi.
115 Horizon, seems wrapped in a muddy cloud, upon the approach of winter, under
the line, i. 378 Horn, to wind it, and to carry the hawk fair, formerly
sufficient accomplishments for noblemen's sons, v. 118 Horns, in what manner
those of animals are produced, ii. 101 -- grow differently in deer from those
of sheep or cows -- deers horns furrowed along the sides, and why, iii. 97 --
in every respect resembling a vegetable substance, grafted upon the head of the
stag, iii. 99 -- beauty and size of those of a stag, mark their strength and
their vigor, iii. 98 -- the time of shedding them -- severe winters retard
shedding the horns in stags, iii. 99, 100 -- generally increase in thickness
and height from the second year to the eighth -- partake of the nature of the
soil, iii. 100 -- their horns shed, they seek the plainer part of the country,
remote from those animals they are then unable to oppose; and walk with their
heads stooping down, as to prevent striking against the branches of trees, iii.
101 -- of a stag, called his head -- their names according to different ages of
the stag, iii. 113, 114 -- of the elk applied to the same purposes as
hartshorn, iii. 148 -- the author saw one, of ten feet nine inches from one tip
to the other, iii. 141 -- of the reindeer converted into glue, iii. 167 -- of
the rhinoceros sometimes from three to three feet and an half long, composed of
the most solid substance, and pointed to inflict most fatal wounds, iv. 286 --
of owls nothing more than two or three feathers that stand up on each side of
the head, over the ear, v. 140 Horses, characteristic marks given by Linnaeus
-- eats hemlock without injury, ii. 341 -- near as the ape approaches man in
internal conformation, so the horse is the most remote, ii. 342 -- wild horses
herd together, and feed in droves of five or six hundred -- one among their
number always stands a sentinel, ii. 343 -- there are but three animals of the
horse kind, ii. 390 -- a ruminating animal, iii. 5 -- in a course of years
impoverish the ground, iii. 10 -- eats two hundred and sixty-two plants, and
rejects two hundred and twelve, iii. 176 -- famished horses more hairy than
those fed plentifully, iii. 355 -- a horse will not carry upon its back, a
weight of more than two or three hundred pounds, ii. 112 -- to estimate the
strength of a horse, is not to try what he can carry, but what he can draw --
he draws a load ten men cannot move; and in some cases a draft horse draws
better being somewhat loaded, ii. 114 -- allured by music, ii. 169 -- not
readily attacked by the lion -- the combats between them in Italy, ii. 319 --
for hunting lions, must be of that sort called charossi; all others fly at the
sight of the lion, iii. 226 -- are killed by wild asses, ii. 380 -- destroyed
by the American bat, called vampyre, in South America, iv. 145 -- one fond of
oysters, ii. 327 -- from what country the horse came originally uncertain --
according to the ancients, wild horses once in Europe -- the colder climates do
not agree with them, ii. 344 -- how wild horses are caught -- set at liberty
they never become wild again -- the buccaneers agreeably surprised to see their
faithful horses present themselves again with their usual assiduity, and
receive the rein, ii. 345 -- wild horses finding a tame horse to associate with
them, gather round him, and oblige him to seek safety by flight, ii. 346 --
this animal in its state of nature in the old, not the new world, ii. 345 --
countries where wild horses are found, ii. 346 -- the natives of Angola, or
Cafraria, catch a horse only to eat him -- Arabian wild horses, the most
beautiful breed, the most generous, swift and persevering, ii. 347 -- the
negroes show terror and surprise, when first they see a horse, ii. 346 -- no
Arabian, however poor, but has his horse -- tame Arabian horses, some valued at
a thousand ducats, ii. 349 -- different classes among the Arabians -- they know
the race of a horse by his appearance -- Arabians preserve the pedigree of
their horses with care, for several ages, ii. 350 -- countries into which the
race of their horses has spread itself, ii. 354 -- they take the wild horses
with traps -- the young horse considered by them as a great delicacy; they
feast upon him while any part is remaining -- the usual manner of trying the
swiftness of Arabian horses, by hunting the ostrich; and an horse of the first
speed is able to outrun it, ii. 348 -- treat their horses gently -- hold a
discourse with them -- written attestations given to persons who buy Arabian
horses, ii. 351 -- they stand stock still in the midst of their career, the
rider happening to fall, ii. 352 -- keep them saddled at their tents from
morning to night, to prevent surprise -- when the Arabians begin to break their
horses, ii. 353 -- how the Arabians dress and feed their horses, ii. 352 --
first began the management of horses in the time of sheque Ismael, ii. 349 --
the rapidity of the flight of Arabian horses is such that the dogs give up the
pursuit, ii. 347 -- upon computation, the speed of the English horses is one
fourth greater, carrying a rider, than that of the swiftest barb without one,
ii. 355 -- Numidian race much degenerated -- the Tingitanians and Egyptians
have the fame of rearing the finest horses, for size and beauty, ii. 356 --
horses of Barbary -- an Italian peculiar sport, in which horses of this breed
run against each other, ii. 354 -- Spanish genette described, ii. 356 -- those
of Andalusia pass for the best, and preferred as war horses to those of every
other country -- Italian horses have a particular aptitude to prance, ii. 357
-- the horses of India, weak and washy, ii. 362 -- fed with peace, sugar, and
butter -- one brought to England not much larger than a common mastiff --
climates excessively hot seem unfavourable to horses -- remarkable sports on
horseback -- the horses of the Gold Coast and Guinea extremely little, but very
manageable, ii. 363, 364 -- of China, weak, little, ill-shaped, and cowardly --
those of Corea so timorous, as not to be serviceable in war -- Tartar horses
very serviceable in war; they were properly the conquerors of China, ii. 364 --
march two or three days without stopping -- continue five or six, without
eating more than a handful of grass at every eight hours; and remain without
drinking four and twenty hours -- lose all their strength when brought into
China or the Indies; thrive pretty well in Persia and Turkey, ii. 365 --
ancient opinions on the nature and qualities of the horses of Thessaly, Achaia,
Ethiopia, Arabia, Afric, Italy and particularly of Apulia, of Sicily,
Capadocia, Syria, Armenia, Media, Persia, of Sardinia and Corsica, of Spain,
Walachia, Transylvania, of Denmark, Scandinavia, Flanders, of the Gaulish
horses, of the German, Swiss, Hungarian, and lastly of the Indian horses, ii.
365, 366 -- Danish horses of such excellent size and strong make, that they are
preferred to all others for draught, ii. 357 -- some streaked like the tiger,
or mottled like the leopard -- German and Hungarian horses -- Dutch horses are
good for draught; the best come from the province of Friezeland -- the Flanders
horses -- few French horses good, ii. 358 -- in general are heavy shouldered --
the best of that country come from Limosin, and Normandy furnishes the next --
American tame horses admirable, ii. 359 -- method of hunting with them, ii. 360
-- islands of the Archipelago have very good horses -- those of Crete were in
great reputation among the ancients, at present little used in the country
itself, because of the unevenness of the ground -- the original horses of
Morocco, smaller than the Arabian breed -- in Turkey there are horses of all
races -- Persian horses, in general, the most beautiful and most valuable of
all the East, ii. 361 -- some greatly esteemed in the Ukraine, in Walachia,
Poland, and Sweden, ii. 365 -- with bushy tails, and manes down to the ground,
ii. 366 -- English horses excel the Arabian in size and swiftness; are more
durable than the barb, and more hardy than the Persian -- one instance of their
great rapidity, in the admirable Childers, frequently known to move above
eighty-two feet and a half in a second, ii. 367, 368 -- fault of our manner of
breaking horses -- the French managed horse never falls before, but more
usually on one side -- the English are for speed and dispatch, the French, and
other nations, are more for parade and spirit, ii. 368 -- English hunters
considered the noblest and the most useful horses in the world -- Roger de
Belegme, the first recorded to have attempted mending our native breed, ii. 369
-- number of horses in London in the time of king Stephen, said to have
amounted to twenty thousand -- in the times of queen Elizabeth, the kingdom
could not supply two thousand horses to form the cavalry -- Powisland, in
Wales, for many ages famous for a swift and generous race of horses, and why,
ii. 370 -- perfections which a horse ought to have, according to Camerarius,
ii. 372, 373 -- the horse and the ass differ not so much in form as the cow and
the bison, yet the former are distinct animals, and the latter animals of the
same kind, iii. 15 Seahorse, described, vi. 289 Hortensius, the orator, the
first who had peacocks served up at an entertainment in Rome, v. 173 Hospitals
erected in India, for the maintenance of all kinds of vermin, ii. 225 -- for
monkies, erected by the Bramins, iv. 234 -- Aldrovandus, having spent a fortune
for the purposes of enlightening mankind, was at last so geatly reduced as to
want bread, to feel the ingratitude of his country, and to die a beggar in a
public hospital, vi. 117 Hottentots, outstrip lions in the chase, as travelers
report, ii. 114 -- make much and very extraordinary use of the bison, iii. 21,
22 Hound, harrier, and beagle, all of the same kind, iii. 283 -- grey-matin
hound, transported to the North, becomes a great Danish dog; and this, sent
into the South becomes a greyhound of different sizes; and the same,
transported into Ireland, the Ukraine, Tartary, Epirus, and Albania, becomes
the great wolf dog, known by the name of the Irish wolf-dog, iii. 284 -- the
blood hound, a dog of the generous kind -- and likewise the gaze-hound, and the
greyhound, iii. 286 -- the blood hound a dog of great use, and in high esteem
among our ancestors -- its employ -- the gaze-hound hunted, like our
greyhound, by the eye, not by the scent, iii. 287 Grey-hound-fox, the largest,
tallest, and boldest of the kind, iii. 332 Howlet, a kind of owl without horns,
v. 141 Hudson's-Bay, above twelve thousand martins skins annually imported from
thence into England, iii. 272 Huers, name given to the men employed to give
signals where to extend the nets in the pilchard-fishery, vi. 333 Hughes, has
described a species of polypus, but mistaken its nature, and called it a
sensitive flowering plant, viii. 191 Hull, had the honor of first attempting
that profitable branch of trade, the whale-fishery, vi. 205 Humber, a new
island formed at the mouth of this river -- it is about nine miles in
circumference, and worth to the proprietor about eight hundred pounds a year,
i. 132 Humming-bird, is the smallest of birds, and seems nearly allied to the
insect, v. 40 -- belongs to the sparrow-kind, v. 314 -- the smallest of them
about the size of a hazel-nut -- its description -- the larger humming-bird is
near half as big as the common wren -- its description -- are seen fluttering
about the flowers, without ever lighting upon them -- their wings in such rapid
motion, it is impossible to discern their colors, except by their glittering,
v. 356 -- but only extracting the honey as with a kiss -- their nests and the
number of eggs, v. 357 -- their time of incubation, v. 358 -- instance of their
docility -- countries where found -- in the Leeward Islands, they continue in a
torpid state during the severity of winter, v. 359 -- Labat asserts, that
beside the humming noise produced by their wings, they have a pleasing
melancholy melody in their voices, small and proportioned to their organs --
the Indians made use of this pretty bird's plumage -- in what manner the
children take them -- when taken, they are instantly killed, and hung up in the
chimney to dry; some dry them in stoves, v. 360 -- at present the bird is taken
rather for selling as a curiosity to Europeans, than an ornament for
themselves, v. 361 Hump of the bison of different sizes, weighing from forty to
fifty pounds, sometimes less -- cuts and tastes like a dressed udder, iii. 23
-- in a few generations it wears away, iii. 24 Hunger, every animal endures the
wants of sleep and hunger with less injury to health than man, ii. 124 --
hunger kills man sooner than watchfulness -- more dreadful in its approaches
than continuance, ii. 125 -- dreadful effects of hunger, related to the author
by the captain of a ship, who was one of six that endured it in its
extremities, ii. 126, 127 -- different opinions concerning the cause of hunger,
ii. 128 -- few instances of men dying, except at sea, of absolute hunger --
those men whose every day may be considered as an happy escape from famine, at
last die of a disorder caused by hunger, ii. 129 -- the number of such as die
in London of hunger supposed not less than two thousand in a year, ii. 130 --
method of palliating hunger among the American Indians, ii. 133 -- instances of
amazing patience in hunger, ii. 217 Hunters, the English considered as the
noblest and the most useful horses in the world, ii. 369 -- terms used by
hunters in pursuing the stag, iii. 114 -- names invented by them for the stag,
iii. 113 -- for the fallow-deer, iii. 128 Hunting, the natural right of hunting
made royal, and when, iii. 109 -- the stag and the buck performed in the same
manner in England, and how, iii. 112, 116 -- the wolf, iii. 318, 319 -- wolves
used in hunting, iii. 321 -- hunting of the fox, iii. 328 -- ancient manner of
hunting the stag, iii. 119 -- the manner in Sicily, iii. 120 -- and in China,
iii. 122 -- hunting the sable chiefly the lot of the exiles in Siberia, iii.
375 -- the ouran-outang, or wild man, in Borneo, iv. 200 -- a favorite
amusement of the king, 200 -- of the elephant at the Cape of Good Hope, iv. 280
-- the method used to take it alive, iv. 271, 272 -- manner of hunting the
ostrich by the Arabians, v. 59, 60 -- and by the Struthophagi, v. 61 -- manner
of hunting the turkey, v. 179 Hurco, (Aufidius) charged by Pliny with being the
first who fatted peacocks for the feasts of the luxurious, v. 172 Hurricane,
the cloud preceding a hurricane, called by sailors, bull's eye, described, i.
359 -- houses, made of timber, bend to the blast of the hurricane like osiers,
and recover their rectitude -- hurricanes offensive to the sense of smelling --
maggots brought with them -- common in all tropical climates; on the coasts of
Guinea, frequently three or four in a day, i. 360 -- their seasons upon those
coasts, at Loango and the opposite coast of Africa, i. 361 -- the hurricane
called tornado, its dreadful effects, i. 361 et seq. Hus, in Greek signifies a
sow, and huoina derives from it, iii. 342, 343 Huso, the isinglass fish, caught
in great quantities in the Danube, from October to January -- furnishes the
commodity called isinglass -- often above four hundred pounds weight -- its
flesh salted is better tasted, and turned red like salmon, vi. 282 Hyena, no
words give an idea adequate to this animal's figure, deformity, and fierceness,
iii. 343 -- more savage and untameable than any quadruped -- its description,
iii 341, 342 -- defends itself against the lion, is a match for the panther,
and attacks the ounce, which it seldom fails to conquer -- an obscene and
solitary animal -- its first howl sometimes mistaken for the voice of a man a
moaning -- its latter like the violent efforts of reaching, iii. 343 -- whence
it first took its name, iii. 342 -- native of the torrid zone, resides in the
caverns of mountains, the clefts of rocks, or dens it has formed under earth,
iii. 344 -- taken ever so young, it never can be tamed -- sometimes attacks
man, and carries off cattle -- its eyes shine by night; and it is asserted that
it sees better by night than by day -- scrapes up graves, and devours dead
bodies, how putrid soever -- absurdities of the ancients about this animal,
iii. 344, 345
I.
Jabiru, and jabiru-guacu, birds of the crane kind, natives of Brasil, v. 388
-- their descriptions, v. 389 Jackalls, hunt in a pack, and encourage each
other by mutual cries -- what has given rise to the report of its being the
lion's provider, ii. 322 -- travelers have mistaken the jackall for the fox,
iii. 333 -- one of the commonest wild animals in the East; yet scarce any less
known in Europe; or less distinctly described by natural historians -- its
description -- its cry a lamentation resembling that of human distress -- is
more noisy in its pursuits than the dog, more voracious than the wolf -- never
goes alone, but always in a pack of forty or fifty together -- seems little
afraid of man; pursues its game to the doors, without apprehension -- enters
insolently into sheep folds, yards, and stables, and finding nothing else,
devours leather harnesses, boots, and shoes -- scratches up new made graves,
and devours the corpse how putrid soever, iii. 335 -- the corpse how dug up --
follows armies, and keeps in the rear of caravans -- the most putrid substances
it greedily devours -- hides in holes by day, and appears abroad at night-fall,
iii. 336 -- hunts by the scent, iii. 337 -- irreconcilable antipathy between
it and the dog, iii. 338 -- no wonder it be voracious and why -- is as stupid
as impudent -- instance of it -- Indian peasants often chase it as we do foxes,
iii. 338, 339 Jack-daw, its description, v. 230 -- rings found in the nest of a
tame jack-daw, v. 222 Jacobines, a kind of pigeons, v. 293 Jaculus, the
swiftest serpent, its manner of progression by coiling, vii. 182 Jaguar, or the
panther of America, iii. 252, 253 James, the hermit, said to have lived an
hundred and four years, ii. 132 Japan, the emperor made a present, to the value
of sixty thousand crowns, for a zebra, which a governor of Batavia had given to
him, ii. 398 Japanese, description of that people, ii. 222 Jaw, the upper,
thought by many quite immovable; that it moves in man, an easy experiment will
evince -- has its proper muscles behind the head for thus raising and
depressing it, ii. 90 -- the under jaw in the embryo much advanced before the
upper; in the adult, it hangs more backward, ii. 91 -- and in a Chinese face it
falls still more backward than with us; the difference is thought half an inch,
the mouth being shut naturally -- M'Laurin, a professor at Edinburgh, was
subject to have his jaw dislocated -- the under jaw has often an involuntary
quivering motion; and often a state of langour produces another, that of
yawning, a very sympathetic kind of languid motion, ii. 92 -- ridiculous
instance of this sympathetic affection commonly practiced upon the same famous
M'Laurin, ii. 92 Jay, one of the most beautiful of the British birds -- its
description -- feeds upon fruits, kills small birds, and is extremely docile,
v. 241, 242 -- lays its eggs in the holes deserted by the wood-pecker, v. 253
Ibex, a native of the Alps, the Pyrenees, and the mountains of Greece -- its
description, iii. 62 Ibis, the Egyptians paid divine honors to this bird, v.
384 -- different opinions concerning the ancient and modern ibis -- Maillet's
observations to this purpose -- the true ibis thought a bird of the vulture
kind, called by some the capon of Pharaoh, v. 385 Ice, very elastic, i. 180 --
floats of it diffused into plains of above two hundred leagues in length -- and
mountains of it rising amidst them -- flat ice, and mountain ice, i. 243 --
their formation, i. 244 -- mountains of it presenting the resemblance of a
glory, i. 245 Ichneumon, by some injudiciously denominated the cat of Pharaoh,
one of the boldest and most useful animals of the weasel-kind -- used in Egypt
for the same purposes as cats in Europe -- description, iii. 376 -- discovers
and destroys the eggs of the crocodile, iii. 377 -- serpents its most natural
food -- grows fast and dies soon, iii. 379 -- easily strangles a cat stronger
and larger than itself, iii. 378 -- countries where found, iii. 379 -- attacks
every living thing it is able to overcome, and fears not the force of the dog,
nor the claws of the vulture, iii. 377 -- takes the water like an otter, and
will continue under much longer, iii. 378 -- not able to support the rigor of
our winters -- one come from the island of Ceylon climbed up the walls and the
trees with very great ease, iii. 379 -- this animal one of those formerly
worshipped by the Egyptians, iii. 380 Ichneumon fly, of all others the most
formidable to insects of various kinds, viii. 46 -- it makes the body of the
caterpillar the place for depositing its eggs, viii. 47 -- the tribe is not the
caterpillar's offspring, as was supposed, but its murderers, viii. 48 --
description -- whence its name -- fears not the wasp, and plunders its
habitations, viii. 111 -- its weapon of defense -- flies of this tribe owe
their birth to the destruction of some other insect, within whose body they
have been deposited, and upon whose vitals they have preyed, till they came to
maturity, viii. 12 -- various appetites of the various kinds of this fly, viii.
113 -- the millions of insects this fly kills in a summer inconceivable, viii.
114 Ichneumon, a root the Indians believe an antidote for the bite of the asp
or the viper, iii. 377 Idra, the deplorable infirmities of the workmen in the
quicksilver mines near it, i. 79 Jean-le-Blanc, a kind of eagle -- its
distinctive marks, v. 98 Jenisca, in Tartary, a river, i. 210 -- receives above
sixty lesser rivers, i. 217 Jenkins, a peasant, lived to an hundred and
sixty-five years, without much regularity, ii. 201 Jester, in England, as late
as the times of king James I. the court was furnished with a jester, ii. 251
Jevraska, name given to the marmout in Siberia, iv. 48 Jewels, the richest
jewels found in an Aethiop's ear, a proverb, ii. 98 Ignis fatuus, or wandering
fire, i. 380 Iguana, description of this animal, vii. 149 -- its flesh the
greatest delicacy of Africa and America -- its food, vii. 150 -- in what manner
it is taken, vii. 151 Jiboya, the Great, of Java and Brasil, the dimensions of
this serpent, vii. 225 Ilex, the berry-bearing ilex, viii. 143 Imagination by
day, as well as by night, always employed, ii. 143 -- very remarkable instance
of its power in women, ii. 245, 246 Impaling, in some courts of the more
barbarous princes of India, they employ the elephant to impale the criminals on
its enormous tusks, iv. 279 Impregnation, the hare, though already impregnated,
admits the male, and receives a second impregnation, iv. 6 -- in what manner
the sea and garden snails impregnate each other respectively, vii. 22, 30, 31
-- the bivalve shellfish require no assistance from each other toward
impregnation, vii. 41 -- frogs impregnated without any apparent instruments of
generation, an object of enquiry; continues in great obscurity -- experiments
made to this purpose, vii. 78, 79 Impulsion, manner of acting upon the heavenly
bodies, i. 4 Incas, father Acosta, and Garcilasso de la Vega, have seen the
bodies of several incas perfectly preserved from corruption, ii. 273 India
(East) in the warm countries of India, the women are marriageable at nine or
ten, and the men at twelve or thirteen, ii. 71 -- description of the
inhabitants of the islands that lie scattered in the Indian ocean, ii. 223 --
over all India, children arrive sooner at maturity, than in Europe -- they
often marry, and consummate, the husband at ten years old, and the wife at
eight, and frequently have children at that age, vi. 224 -- Indians have long
been remarkable for cowardice and effeminacy -- they may be considered as a
feeble race of sensualists -- their dress, ii. 225 -- the horses of India are
weak and washy, ii. 362 -- lions are found to diminish in their numbers in this
country, iii. 215 -- the Indians eagerly pursue the porcupine, in order to make
embroidery of its quills, and to eat its flesh, iv. 112 -- they eat bats in the
East Indies, iv. 141 -- in some courts of the more barbarous princes, the
elephants are used as executioners -- in what manner that animal performs this
horrid task -- and impales criminals on its enormous tusks, iv. 279 -- in the
whole peninsula of India, they employ the elephant in carrying or drawing
burdens, iv. 278 -- and also in launching ships, iv. 279 India (West) whence
originally comes the flat heads of the American Indians, ii. 239 Indus, river,
its course, i. 212 -- its water, and that of the Thames, the most light and
wholesome in the world, i. 170 -- the tide at the mouth of this river the
greatest known, i. 257 Infants just born, may be said to come from one element
into another; and why, ii. 53 -- open their eyes the instant of their birth,
ii. 54 -- more capable of sustaining hunger, and more patient of cold than
grown persons; and why, ii. 58 -- infants have milk in their own breasts --
their life very precarious, till the age of three or four, ii. 59 -- instances
of it, ii. 60 -- the comparative progress of the understanding greater in
infants, than in children of three or four years old, ii. 61 Inundations
generally greater toward the source of rivers, than farther down; and why, i.
207 -- some distribute health and plenty -- others cause diseases, famine, and
death, i. 218 -- every inundation of the sea attended with some correspondent
dereliction of another shore -- one of the most considerable inundations in
history, is that which happened in the reign of Henry I. -- an inundation in
the territory of Dort, destroyed an hundred thousand persons -- and yet a
greater number round the Dullart -- remarkable inundations in Friezland and
Zealand, in which more than three hundred villages were overwhelmed -- their
remains continue visible at the bottom of the water in a clear day, i. 278 --
some in which the sea has overflowed the country, and afterward retired, i.
279 -- inundation of the Thames at Dagenham, in Essex, i. 283 -- instantly
produced by land spouts, i. 396 Insects, many of the tribes brought forth from
the egg, ii. 27 -- in the internal parts of South America, and Africa, they
grow to a prodigious size; and why -- those of the minute kind in the northern
climates not half so large as in the temperate zone, ii. 6 -- the ocean has its
insects -- their feet are placed upon their backs, and almost all without eyes,
ii. 7 -- in some countries almost darken the air, and a candle cannot be
lighted, without their instantly flying upon it, and putting out the flame, ii.
12, and viii. 158 -- many may be multiplied by being cut in pieces, ii. 23 --
have no eyelids whatsoever, ii. 85 -- the Indians are fearful of killing the
meanest, ii. 225 -- quickly brought to change, and adapt themselves to the
climate, ii. 312 -- have their stomachs composed of muscular fibers -- of a
ruminating kind, iii. 6 -- afford so great a variety, as to elude the search of
the most inquisitive pursuer, v. 3 -- those with the greatest number of legs
move the slowest, vii. 63 -- the general definition of insects, vii. 239 -- the
different classes, vii. 241 to 244 -- general characteristics of insects
without wings, vii. 246 -- of those that have wings, vii. 315 -- Swammerdam has
excelled the insects he dissected, in patience, industry, and perseverance,
vii. 17 -- some continue under the form of an aurelia not ten days; some
twenty; some several months, and even for a year, viii. 26 -- general rule,
that the female is larger than the male, viii. 39 -- every insect that lives a
year after its full growth, is obliged to pass four or five months without
nourishment, and will seem to be dead all that time, viii. 125 -- description
of that which forms and resides in the gall-nut, viii. 148 Instinct of animals
in choosing the proper times of copulation, ii. 337 -- the Guinea pig has not
that natural instinct so common to almost every other creature, iv. 57
Intestines of sheep found to be above thirty times the length of the body, iii.
209 -- those of the wild cat not above three times the length of its body, iii.
210 -- this shortness still unaccounted for, iii. 211 -- intestines of
ruminating animals enlarged by nature, to take in a greater supply -- those of
the carnivorous kind are short, iii. 2 -- also thin and lean; but of the
ruminating are strong, fleshy, and covered with fat, iii. 4 -- in all animals
the size of the intestines proportioned to the nature of the food, ii. 318 --
of the reindeer washed like our tripe, in high esteem among the Laplanders,
iii. 167 -- of the bat, in some measure resemble those of man, iv. 135 -- those
of the manati longer, in proportion, than those of any other creature, the
horse excepted, iv. 185 -- the tribe of wood-peckers want that intestine,
called the caecum, v. 249 -- the lamprey seems to have but one, vi. 272 --
those of the crab have many convolutions, vi. 368 Johndory, Quin noted for a
sauce for this fish, vi. 182 Joints, hair in its growth sends forth branches at
the joints, ii. 87 Jonelin, has obliged the curious with the first accurate
description of the form and nature of the sable, iii. 373 Ireland not infested
with wolves, iii. 319 -- frogs designedly introduced into that kingdom some
years before the Norway rat, iv. 66 -- that rat put a stop to their increase,
and the frog is once more almost extinct in that kingdom, iv. 67 -- the mole
utterly a stranger there, iv. 91 Iron extracted from all the substances upon
earth, i. 74 Isatis, an animal very common in all northern countries bordering
upon icy sea, and seldom found in warm climates -- description, iii. 339 --
burrows like the fox, and when with young, the female retires to her kennel, in
the same manner as the fox -- its kennel very narrow, and extremely deep, has
many out-lets -- manner of coupling, time of gestation, and number of young,
all similar to what is found in the fox -- brings forth at the end of May, or
the beginning of June, iii. 340 -- considered as between the dog and the fox,
iii. 339 -- changes its color, and is at one time brown, at another white,
iii. 340 -- time in which it is called the crost-fox, iii. 341 Isinglass
serviceable in medicine, and many arts, vi. 282 -- manner of making it --
principally furnished from Russia, where great quantities are prepared
surprisingly cheap -- Mr. Jackson found out a method of making a glue that
answered the purposes of isinglass, vi. 282, 283 Islands, new formed, in two
ways, i. 125 -- thirteen islands in the Mediterranean appearing at once
emerging from the water, i. 126 -- one new formed in the year 1720 near that of
Tercera, i. 128 -- formed at the mouths of many rivers, and how, i. 130 -- a
beautiful and large one formed at the mouth of the river Nanquin in China, not
less than sixty miles long, and about twenty broad, i. 131 -- appear, at first,
infinitely greater than they naturally are, i. 388 -- seem to travel to the
shore, and represent a wood -- the scene then shifted, represents curious
figures, ships with sails, streamers, and flags; antique elevated castles, and
at length vanish into nothing, i. 389 Ismael, sheque, in his time the Arabians
first began the management of horses, ii. 349 Ispahan, the prince's messengers
go on foot thirty-six leagues in fourteen hours, ii. 114 Italy, the horses
there have a particular aptitude to prance, ii. 357 Jucatan, a peninsula in the
gulf of Mexico, formerly a part of the sea, i. 276 Juda-goat common in Guinea,
Angola, and all along the coasts of Africa, not much larger than a hare, iii.
59 Jugular fish, name given to that fish which has the ventral fins placed more
forward than the pectoral, vi. 303 Julian's Bay (St.) an American harbor,
forty-nine degrees south of the line -- Ferdinand Magellan happened to winter
in it, ii. 260 Juniper, the Laplanders drink water, in which these berries have
been infused, ii. 216 -- its shade was fatal, if we credit the ancients, i. 326
Ivory, the tusks of the babyrouessa are a very fine ivory, smoother and whiter
than that of the elephant, but not so hard or serviceable, iii. 194 -- that of
the morse more esteemed than that of the elephant, being whiter and harder, iv.
182 -- almost all our ivory comes from Africa, where the greatest part is found
in the forests, iv. 281 -- the tusks of the mammouth converted to the purposes
of ivory, iv. 282 -- teeth of the narwhal far surpass ivory in all its
qualities, vi. 212 Justinian, the emperor, till his time the sea was open to
all nations, i. 232 Ivy-berries, showers of them raised by tempests in one
country, and falling in another, i. 390
K.
Kabassou, or cataphractus, one of the largest kinds of the armadilla, iv. 133
Kamskatka, description of its natives, ii. 213 Kanguroo, an animal first
discovered and described by Mr. Banks, iv. 351, et seq. Kempfer very well
describes the effects of the shock of the torpedo, vi. 262 Keratophites, among
the coraline fungi, viii. 197 Kermes, an insect of great use in medicine and
dying -- its description, viii. 143 -- the differences of the male from the
female -- the harvest of the kermes greater or less in proportion to the
severity of the winter -- women gather them before sunrising, tearing them off
with their nails, viii. 144 Kestril, a bird of the generous breed of hawks, v.
122 Kevel, name of a second variety of gazelles made by Mr. Buffon, iii. 73
Kilda (St.) a rocky island -- its shores to the West six hundred fathom
perpendicular above the surface of the sea, i. 272 -- its rocks more than three
quarters of a mile high, vi. 78 -- the inhabitants consume annually near
twenty-three thousand young gannets, and a great quantity of their eggs, vi. 73
Killer, a cetaceous animal of surprising strength, which attacks the whale, vi.
204 ^inds of animals not actually distinguished by horns, color, position of
the ears, or fineness of hair, iii. 60 -- difficult to fix precise boundaries
between the goat-kind, and the deer, iii. 70 -- the gazelles form a distinct
kind, iii. 71 -- all of the deer kind have no gall bladder, iii. 94 Kine, in
Iceland are without horns, iii. 19 King, a question in schools, which man most
happy, the beggar by night, and king by day; or the beggar by day, and king by
night, ii. 139 King-fisher, a remarkable bird -- its description, vi. 142 --
places it frequents, and how it takes its prey -- the plumage a beautiful
variety of brilliant colors, vi. 143 -- instances of credulity with respect to
this bird, iv. 144 -- its nest, or rather hole, very different from that
described by the ancients, vi. 145, 146 -- feeds upon fish in that hole --
soetid from the remains of fish -- the king-fisher is found with from five to
nine eggs, which the female continues to hatch -- though disturbed and robbed,
she returns, and lays again -- Reaumur's account of this -- season for
excluding the brood -- the male, faithful beyond the turtle, brings the female
large provisions of fish, and keeps her plump and fat -- he used to twitter
before, now enters the nest quietly and privately -- the young hatched in
twenty days -- differ in their size and beauty, vi. 146, 147 King-fisher, the
Halcyon -- Cicero has written a long poem in praise of this bird, of which but
two lines remain -- the emperor Gordian has also written a poem on it, nothing
of which is left -- St. Ambrose's credulity concerning this bird, vi. 144 --
fables the modern vulgar have of it, vi. 147, 148 -- its flesh unfit to be
eaten, and its beautiful plumage preserves its luster longer than any other,
vi. 148 Kircher, his calculations of the heights of the mountains are
incredible, and why, i. 154 -- has set the voices of birds to music, v. 143
Kite, one of the baser race of hawks, v. 119 -- distinguished by its forky
tail, and slow floating motion, v. 129 -- from the greatest height darts down
on its prey with unerring aim, v. 10 -- seems ever upon the wing, and to make
no effort in flying -- lives upon accidental carnage, every bird in the air
being able to make its retreat from it -- small birds wounded, or straying
chickens it seizes with rapacity, v. 129, 130 -- used for training falcons, and
how lured with the great horned owl, when caught for that purpose, v. 144, 145
Kitten, of all young animals none more prettily playful, iii. 202 Klein, his
method of classing animals, ii. 296 Knobber, name of the stag the second year,
iii. 113 Knot, small bird of the crane kind, vi. 23 -- a bird of passage, vi.
28 Kob, the name of the sixth variety of gazelles by Mr. Buffon, iii. 74 Koba,
name of the fifth variety of gazelles by Mr. Buffon, iii. 74 Kraken, all that
has been said of this great fish seems fictitious, yet there is a possibility
of its existence, vi. 193 Krantz's account of the origin and formation of the
ice-mountains in Greenland, i. 246
L.
Labrus, the wrasse, description of this fish, vi. 307 Labyrinth of Candia, a
subterranean wonder, supposed the work of art, i. 63 Labyrinth, convolutions in
the windpipe and lungs of some birds, v. 13 Lama, the camel of the new world,
iv. 312 -- countries where found -- their flesh an excellent food -- their
hair, or rather wool, spun into beautiful clothing -- carry their burdens over
precipices and craggy rocks, where men can scarce accompany them, iv. 313 --
description and age -- manner of coupling, iv. 314 -- its food -- exceeds the
camel in temperance -- requires little water, being supplied with quantities of
saliva, the only offensive weapon it has to testify its resentment -- the
Indians say, where this saliva falls, it will from its acrimonious nature burn
the skin, or cause dangerous eruptions, iv. 315 -- color and wool -- habits
and marks of agility in the state of nature -- seems the largest of the camel
kind in America -- the natives hunt the wild lama for its fleece, iv. 316 -- a
smaller weaker sort of the camel-kind, called also guanacoe and paco -- the
manufacture of stuffs, carpets, and quilts, made of the wool of the paco, form
a considerable branch of commerce in South America, and might usefully be
extended to Europe, iv. 317 Lambs, how to be produced all the year round, ii.
338 -- the third an ewe brings forth supposed the best, iii. 45 Lamprey, its
food, vi. 272 -- a fish every way resembling the lamprey, was possessed of the
numbing quality of the torpedo, vi. 267 -- people will not venture to touch
those of Ireland -- a species very different from ours served up as a delicacy
among the modern Romans -- doubtful whether it be the murena of the ancients,
which our lamprey is not -- ours differently estimated, according to the
season, vi. 269 -- those of the river Severn the most delicate of all fish --
description of the fish, extraordinary power of adhering to stones -- instance
of it, vi. 270 -- Muralto, giving the anatomy of this fish, makes no mention of
the lungs, for which it has absolute necessity to breathe in the air, vi. 271
-- its time of leaving the sea annually, in order to spawn, is the beginning of
spring -- after a few months, it returns to the sea -- peculiar preparation for
spawning -- the young from eggs -- the female remains at the place where
produced they are excluded till they come forth, has her family playing about
her, and conducts them in triumph to the ocean, vi. 272 -- some continue in
fresh water till they die -- a single brood the extent of the female's
fertility, two years being the limit of her existence -- best season for them
the months of March, April, and May -- are usually taken in nets with salmon;
sometimes in baskets at the bottom of the river -- old custom for the city of
Gloucester annually to present the king with a lamprey-pye, vi. 273 -- a
senator of Rome used to throw into his ponds such of his slaves as displeased
him, to feed the lampreys, vi. 274 Lands, new, produced from the sea, and in
what manner, i. 277 Lanner, bird of the generous breed of hawks, now little
known in Europe, v. 121 Lapland, its division, iii. 153 -- mountains there
preferred to the woods -- the country abounds more than others with marshy
bottoms and weedy lakes -- gnats and gad-flies formidable there, iii. 155, 157
-- the manner of traveling in it, iii. 162 -- Laplanders castrate the
reindeer with their teeth, iii. 363 -- the wolf never attacks a reindeer that
is haltered, and why, iii. 321 -- the isatis found in this country, iii. 340 --
in the forests, squirrels observed to change their habitation; they remove in
numbers from one country to another, iv. 32 Laplanders, one of the first
distinct race of men round the polar regions -- description of their persons
and manners, ii. 213 to 218 -- have in every family a drum for consulting the
devil, ii. 214 -- Gustavus Adolphus attempted in vain to form a regiment of
Laplanders -- use skates to run and slide, and how, ii. 215 -- are all hunters
-- offer their wives and daughters to strangers, ii. 216 -- wants supplied and
riches derived from the reindeer, iii. 149, 155, 166, 167 -- manner of life,
iii. 154 -- boil milk with wood sorrel, and keep it in casks under ground to be
eaten in winter, iii. 166 -- when the lemins draw up to fight, they form
ominous prognostics from their arrangement, iv. 88 -- happy when an army of
lemins comes down among them; they then feast upon their flesh, which dogs and
cats detest, iv. 90 Lapwing, a small bird of the crane-kind, vi. 23 -- its arts
to lead off men and dogs from their nests, vi. 32 -- their seasons of
courtship, vi. 31 Lark, bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 314 -- the sky, the wood,
or the tit-lark distinguishable from other little birds by length of heel and
loud song, v. 333 -- nest, number of eggs, and habits, v. 334 -- those that
remain with us the year throughout are birds of passage in Sweden, v. 318
Sea-Lark, a small bird of the crane-kind, vi. 23 -- breeds in this country, vi.
29 Lava, matter discharged by the eruptions of volcanos, i. 103 Laughter, in
what manner produced, ii. 92 Lance, description of this fish, vi. 311
Lauricocha, a lake wherein the river Amazons has its source, i. 215 St.
Lawrence, a river -- its rise and course, i. 216 -- receives about forty
rivers, i. 218 -- its cataract, i. 223 Laws, one in the Orkney Islands,
entitling any person that kills an eagle to a hen from every house in the
parish where killed, v. 92 Layer, the impression on the place where the stag
has lain, iii. 114 Layers of the earth regularly disposed, but not of the same
kind in every place, i. 56 -- enumeration of layers of earth in a well dug at
Amsterdam, and of another dug at Marly, i. 57, 58 -- a layer, as far as it
extends, always maintains the same thickness -- proceeding to considerable
depths, every layer is thicker -- are sometimes very extensive, and often found
to spread over a space of some leagues in circumference, i. 58 -- remarkable
layers of earth round the city of Modena, i. 282 Lead-Mine, one in Flintshire,
iv. 282 Leather called chamois, made of the skin of that animal, and also from
those of the tame goat, the sheep, and the deer, iii. 69 Leather harness
devoured by the jackall, iii. 335 Leaves, two of a fig tree, by experiment,
imbibed from the earth, two ounces of water in five hours and a half, i. 195
Leech, different kinds -- its description -- takes a large quantity of food,
vii. 306, 307 -- has no anus or passage to eject it from the body when
digested, vii. 308 -- in what it differs from the rest of the reptile tribe,
vii. 309 -- the leech used in medicine, vii. 306 -- a girl of nine years old
killed by leeches, vii. 310 -- best way of applying leeches, vii. 311 Legs, a
man without them performed astonishing feats of dexterity, iv. 250 Leming, a
bold animal of the rat kind, native of Scandinavia, iv. 84 -- often pours down
in myriads from the northern mountains, and, like pestilence, destroys all the
productions of the earth -- Laplanders believe they drop from the clouds --
their description, iv. 85 -- they move, in a square, forward by night, and
lying still by day -- whither their motions are turned nothing can stop them; a
fire, a deep well, a torrent does not turn them out of their direction -- they
never retreat -- interrupted by a boat across a river, they go over it, iv. 86
-- stopped by a stack of hay or corn, they gnaw their way through; and
obstructed by a house they cannot get through, continue before it till they die
-- eat nothing prepared for human subsistence -- never enter a house to destroy
provisions -- passing through a meadow, destroy it in a short time, and leave
it with the appearance of being burnt up and strewed over with ashes -- a man
imprudently attacking one of them, the animal furiously flies at him, barking
somewhat like a puppy, fastens, and does not easily quit its hold, iv. 87 --
their leader forced out of the line after a long defense, and separated from
the rest, sets up a plaintive cry, not of anger, and hangs itself on the fork
of a tree -- they destroy and devour each other -- after incredible
devastations, they separate into armies, opposed with deadly hatred, and move
along the coasts of the larger lakes and rivers -- the Laplanders form
prognostics from the manner of their arrangement -- what prognostics -- the
divisions continue their engagements and animosity until one party be overcome;
then they disappear, iv. 87, 88 -- and it is supposed that having nothing to
subsist on, they devour each other -- their carcases sometimes infect the air
for miles around, and produce malignant disorders -- they seem also to infect
the plants, the cattle often dying in the places where they passed -- the male
larger and more beautifully spotted than the female -- are extremely prolific
-- breeding does not hinder their march, some carrying one young in their mouth
and another on their back -- are greatly preyed upon by the ermine, and even by
the reindeer, iv. 89 -- dogs and cats detest their flesh, but, the Laplanders
esteem it good eating, and devour it greedily, iv. 90 Leo, the emperor, granted
the nations in possession of the shore the sole right of fishing before their
respective territories, i. 232 Leona (Sierra) a kind of apes in that province
of Africa, called baris, properly instructed when young, serve as useful
domestics, iv. 198 Leopard, the large, and the leopard or panther of Senegal --
differences between those animals, iii. 251 -- leopard will not fly at the
approach of the lion, iii. 226 -- the American is neither so fierce nor so
valiant as that of Africa and Asia, ii. 332 Lepadogaster, description of this
fish, vi. 312 Leprosy, in what manner the Indians endeavor to prevent the
Arabian leprosy, or the elephantiasis, a disease to which man and the elephant
are equally subject, iv. 265 Lerot, the middle dormouse, according to Mr.
Buffon, iv. 76 Leymmer, a dog of the generous kind, iii. 286, 288 Libella, the
dragon-fly -- general characteristics, vii. 316, et seq. -- eggs, vii. 317 --
food of the young, vii. 318 -- how they prepare to change from the reptile to
the flying state -- description, vii. 319 -- the strongest and most courageous
of all winged insects, vii. 320 -- the business of impregnation, how performed,
vii. 321, 322 Liboya, the greatest of the serpent kind, vii. 173 Lichen
rangiferinus, the food of the reindeer, a moss in Lapland of two kinds; the
white in the fields, and the black on the trees, iii. 154, 159 Lidme, name of
the eleventh variety of gazelles, by Mr. Buffon, iii. 79 Life, formerly
supposed producible only by oviparous and viviparous generation; but later
discoveries induce many to doubt whether animal life may not be produced merely
from putrefaction, ii. 22 -- the beginning of our lives, as well as the end, is
marked with anguish, ii. 48 -- that of infants very precarious till the age of
three or four -- instances of it, ii. 59, 60 -- the duration of life in general
nearly the same in most countries, ii. 202 -- the most useless and contemptible
of all others the most difficult to destroy, viii. 173 Light, the hand exposed
to broad daylight for some time, then immediately snatched into a dark room,
will still be luminous and remain so for some time, and why -- dangerous to the
sight to look steadily upon bright and luminous objects, and why, ii. 159, 160
-- such persons as read or write for any continuance should choose a moderate
light, ii. 160 Light sent forth by the glowworm, how produced hitherto
inexplicable, viii. 141 -- sent forth by the star-fish resembles that of
phosphorus, viii. 175 Lightning is an electrical flash produced by the
opposition of two clouds, i. 374 -- of the torrid zone is not so fatal or so
dangerous as with us, otherwise those regions would be uninhabitable, i. 379 --
flashing without noise illuminates the sky all around in the torrid zone, i.
377, 379 Lights, northern lights illuminate half the hemisphere, i. 377 Limbs
of the inhabitants near the poles are sometimes frozen and drop off, i. 387 --
some animals live without, and often are seen to reproduce them, viii. 170
Lime, manner of making it in Persia, i. 862 Line, upon the approach of the
winter months under the line, the whole horizon seems wrapped in a muddy cloud,
i. 378 -- in America, all that part of the continent which lies under the line
is cool and pleasant, ii. 233 -- in general, as we approach the line, we find
the inhabitants of each country grow browner, until the color deepens into
perfect blackness, ii. 235 Linnaeus, the celebrated naturalist, supposes man a
native of the tropical climates, and only a sojourner more to the north --
argument to prove the contrary, ii. 240 -- his method of classing animals, ii.
298, 299 -- makes the female of the bat a primas, to rank it in the same order
with man, iv. 138 Linnet, a bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 315, 317 -- taught to
whistle a long and regular tune, v. 345 Lion, produced under the burning sun of
Africa, is the most terrible and most undaunted creature, iii. 214 --
description of this noble animal, iii. 219 to 222 -- he degenerates when
removed from the torrid zone, iii. 213 -- to compare the strength of the lion
with that of man, it should be considered that the claws of this animal give a
false idea of its power, ascribing to its force what is the effect of its arms,
ii. 111 -- leaps twenty feet at a spring, ii. 322 -- a single lion of the
desert often attacks an entire caravan, iii. 216 -- he crouches on his belly,
and continues so with patient expectation, until his prey comes within a proper
distance, iii. 223 -- the female has no mane, iii. 221 -- his roaring is so
loud, that when heard in the night, and re-echoed by the mountains, it
resembles distant thunder, iii. 224 -- does not willingly attack the horse, and
only when compelled by the keenest hunger, ii. 319 -- combats between a lion
and a horse in Italy -- the lion stunned and left sprawling, the horse escapes;
but the lion succeeding, sticks to his prey, and tears the horse in pieces
instantly, ii. 319, 320 -- attends to the call of the jackall, iii. 337 -- in
countries tolerably inhabited, the lion is cowardly, and often scared by the
cries of women and children, iii. 201 Lions, those inhabiting the peopled
countries of Morocco or India scared away with a shout -- the keepers play with
him, plague, and chastise him without a cause; he bears it with composure, but
his anger once excited, the consequences are terrible -- an instance from
Labat, iii. 217 -- numberless accounts assure his anger noble, his courage
magnanimous, and his natural ferocity seldom exerted against his benefactors --
he has spared the lives of those thrown to be devoured by him, afforded them
part of his subsistence, and sometimes abstains from food himself to support
them, iii. 218 -- necessity alone makes him cruel, iii. 219 -- the manner of
hunting them by Hottentots and others, iii. 215, 227 -- horses for hunting them
of that sort called charossi, all others fly at the sight of him, iii. 226 --
the lion prefers the flesh of camels to other food -- is also fond of that of
young elephants -- when old, finding men and quadrupeds together, he attacks
the latter, and never meddles with men, unless provoked, iii. 228 -- manner of
copulation, time of gestation, number brought forth, and time taken to come to
perfection, all known, iii. 229 -- a lion in the Tower of London above seventy
years, iii. 230 -- the lioness fearing her retreat discovered, hides her
tracks, by running back, or brushing them out with her tail, iii. 231 --
becomes terrible with young ones to provide for, iii. 230 -- lions, incited by
desire, fight bloody battles, till one becomes victorious over the rest, iii.
228 -- the size of the lion between three and four feet; the female in all
dimensions about one third less -- there are properly no lions in America; the
puma has received the name of the America-lion, but, when compared, is a very
contemptible animal, iii. 332 -- those of mount Atlas have not the strength or
ferocity of those of Biledulgerid or Zaara -- species of this animal
diminishing daily -- Mr. Shaw observes, the Romans carried fifty times as many
lions from Lybia in one year, for their amphitheatres, as are in the whole
country at this time, iii. 214 -- the same remark made with regard to Turkey,
Persia, and the Indies; where the lions diminish in their number daily, iii.
215 -- reported that he sustains hunger a long time, but thirst he cannot
support -- some believe him in a continual fever -- he drinks as often as he
finds water, and laps it -- he requires about fifteen pound of raw flesh in a
day -- he rather hunts for a fresh spoil, than returns to that he had before --
his breath is offensive, and his urine insupportable, iii. 224 Lion-cat, or
Angora-cat, a beautiful animal, a native of Syria or Persia, iii. 212 Sea-lion,
described in Anson's voyages, regarded as the largest of the seal family, iv.
181 Lipidopus, the garter-fish, its description, vi. 312 Lips, those of the
hare and of the squirrel continually move, whether sleeping or waking, iv. 3
Lithophytes, and coralline substances, viii. 192 Litters, in all animals,
intermediate litters most fruitful; first and last generally produce fewest and
weakest of the kind, ii. 336 Littorales, Latin name for those shells that are
cast upon shore, vii. 13 Liver of a shark affords three or four quarts of oil,
vi. 247 Lizards, differ from every other class of animals, and from each other,
vii. 112, 113 -- whence the greatest distinction, vii. 115 -- general
characteristics, vii. 116 -- along the coasts of Guinea their flesh esteemed a
delicacy, iii. 298 -- the water kind changes its skin every fourth or fifth
day, vii. 145 -- sprinkled with salt, the whole body emits a viscous liquor,
and the lizard dies in three minutes, in great agonies -- the whole of the kind
sustain the want of food in a surprising manner, vii. 146 Chalcidian lizard of
Aldrovandus described, vii. 157 Flying lizard of Java, account of it by Gentil,
vii. 157 Loach, the description of this fish, vi. 314 Lobster, a ruminating
fish, iii. 5 -- very voracious, though without warmth in its body, or red blood
in its veins, vi. 358 -- whatever it seizes upon and has life perishes, however
well defended; they devour each other, and, in some measure, eat themselves;
changing their shell and stomach every year, the old stomach is the first
morsel to glut the new, 358, 364 -- at first sight the head may be mistaken for
the tail -- its description, iii. 358, 359 -- the food of the young, vi. 361 --
the molting season, vi. 362 -- how they change their shells -- many die under
this operation, vi. 362, 363 -- speedy growth of the new shell -- and of itself
after the change -- the claws of unequal magnitude, and why -- at certain
seasons they never meet without an engagement -- wonders this extraordinary
creature offers to imagination -- are endowed with a vital principle that
furnishes out such limbs as have been cut away, vi. 365, 366 -- varieties of
this animal with differences in the claws, little in the habits or conformation
-- the shell black when taken, but turns red by boiling -- common way of taking
the lobster, vi. 367 Locust, the great brown locust seen in several parts of
England in 1748; in some southern kingdoms they are still formidable --
description of this insect, vii. 340, 341 -- in what manner they take the field
-- their devastations, vii. 342 -- are still more noxious when dead, vii. 343
-- instance of it -- account of their devastations in Russia, Poland,
Lithuania, and Barbary, vii. 343, 344 -- transformations, vii. 345 -- eaten by
the natives in many kingdoms of the East; and caught in small nets for that
purpose -- their taste -- are considered as a great delicacy in Tonquin, by the
rich and the poor -- must have been a common food with the Jews, vii. 347 --
description of the great West-Indian locust, the most formidable, vii. 348
Loir, the greater dormouse, so called by Mr. Buffon, iv. 76 Longevity, persons
remarkable for it, ii. 200, 201 Lorenzini, his experiments upon the torpedo,
vi. 266 Lori, the longest of all animals, in proportion to its size --
description -- a native of the island of Ceylon, iv. 241 Loricaria, description
of this fish, vi. 313 Lories, a kind of parrot, v. 272 Louse, its description,
vii. 270 -- whether distinguished by the parts of generation into males and
females, not yet discovered, vii. 273 -- the lousy disease frequent among the
ancients, vii. 274 Wood-louse, the description, vii. 286 -- of great use in
medicine, vii. 287 Leuwenhoeck, his opinion about the rudiments of animals, ii.
18 Luminous appearance of the waves in the night, the cause, i. 247, 248
Lump-fish, its description, vi. 287 -- flung into a pail of water, will stick
so close to the bottom, that on taking the fish by the tail, the pail and
several gallons of water may be lifted -- their flesh, vi. 288 Lungs, animals
before birth make no use of their lungs, iv. 171 -- no anatomist has described
the lungs of the lamprey, vi. 271 -- caterpillars have eighteen lungs, and live
several days in the exhausted receiver of the air-pump, viii. 14 Lybia, its
inhabitants use ostriches as horses -- also at Joar -- instance of it at the
factory of Podore, v. 62 Lyboija, of Surinam, a kind of serpent, thirty-six
feet long, vii. 172 Lynx, distinguished from the ounce, and described -- first
striking distinction between it and those of the panther-kind is the tail --
each hair of this animal is of three different colors -- it is not above the
size of the ounce, iii. 257 -- chiefly met with in the cold countries bordering
on the pole, in the north of Germany, Lithuania, Muscovy, Siberia, and North
America -- those of the new continent are smaller than in Europe -- this animal
has been called lupus cervarius, but for what reason hard to guess -- in its
nature it exactly resembles the cat, is bigger, and near two feet long, is also
bolder and fiercer -- is more delicate than the cat -- resembles the wolf in
nothing, except its cry -- several reports of the lynx, propagated by ignorance
or imposture, iii. 264, 265 Lyster, strangeness of his theory to explain the
invariable motion of winds, i. 342
M.
Macaguo, a kind of monkey described by Mr. Buffon, iv. 233 Maccaw, the large
kind of parrot the size of a raven, v. 275 Machinel-tree, in America, its shade
fatal, i. 362 -- no plant will grow under it, ii. 4 Machines, the invention of
many has rendered human strength less valuable, ii. 119 Mackarel, described,
vi. 307 -- produces five hundred thousand eggs, in one season, vi. 178 -- its
growth, vi. 340 Madagascar, its natives desire nothing so ardently as to
prostitute their wives or daughters to strangers, and for the most trifling
advantages, ii. 74 -- the great bat of that island described, iv. 141, 142
Madder, used by Mr. Belcher to discover the circulation of the blood through
the bones, ii. 194 Madness produced by want of sleep, ii. 135 -- cured by music
-- and also caused by it -- instance in Henry IV. of Denmark, who in his rage
killed his attendants, ii. 170 Maelstroom, Dutch name for a whirlpool, one upon
the coast of Norway, considered as most dreadful and destructive, i. 267 -- the
body of water forming this whirlpool, extended in a circle of above thirteen
miles, i. 268 Magellan, (Ferdinand) a Portuguese of noble extraction, first
discovered the gigantic race of mankind, toward the extremity of South
America, ii. 259 -- account of this discovery -- he was slain upon one of the
Molucca islands, ii. 260 Magni, an Italian traveller discovered the remarkable
grotto of Antiparos, in the Archipelago, i. 67 Maggot of Buffon, the
cynocephalus, the last of the ape kind -- its description, iv. 207 Magpie
thievish; rings found in the nest of a tame magpie, v. 222 -- habits and food
-- when satisfied for the present, it lays up the remainder for another time,
v. 238, 239 -- places where it builds and nests described, v. 240 -- number of
eggs -- in its domestic state, preserves its natural character strictly --
foolish custom of cutting its tongue to teach it to speak, puts the animal to
pain, and baulks the intention, v. 241 Mahometans, considering the hare an
unclean animal, religiously abstain from its flesh, iv. 14 Maimon, the last of
the baboons, Edwards calls it the pigtail -- its description -- native of
Sumatra, does not well endure the rigours of our climate, iv. 215 Maire, (James
Le) a traveller who confirms the existence of giants in America, ii. 261 Maki,
the last of the monkey-kind, iv. 188, 238 -- their description -- many
different kinds of these animals, iv. 239, 241 Malabar, land and sea breezes
upon those coasts, i. 351 Malacopterigii, the barbarous Greek name given to the
soft-finned fish; the prickly-finned sort termed Acanthopterigii, vi. 303
Malahallo, a very considerable volcano in South America, i. 99 Malebranche,
grounds his beautiful theory of monstrous productions upon a famous instance
related by him; and some theory from which he deduces the effects of
imagination upon the foetus, ii. 245, 246 Malbrouk, a monkey of the ancient
continent, iv. 233 -- its description -- the Bramins have hospitals for such as
are sick, or disabled, iv. 234 Maldivia islands, have lands in them at one time
covered with water, and at another free, i. 279 Mallard, a kind of duck, vi.
130 -- with very particular faculties for calling, vi. 134 Malphigi, his famous
experiment upon the stigmata of caterpillars, viii. 14 Mammouth, its tusks,
which are used as ivory, and supposed to belong to the elephant, often weigh
four hundred pounds, iv. 282 Man, differences in his species less than in
animals, and rather taken from the tincture of the skin than variety of figure
-- there are not in the world above six distinct varieties in the race of men,
ii. 212 -- first race in the polar regions, deep brown, short, oddly shaped,
savage, ii. 213 to 219 -- second, the Tartar race, olive colored, middle
sized, ugly, robust, ii. 219 to 221 -- third, the southern Asiatics, dark
olive, slender shaped, strait black hair, feeble, ii. 223 to 226 -- fourth, the
negroes of Africa, black, smooth skin, woolly hair, well shaped, ii. 226 to 228
-- fifth, the Americans, copper color, strait black hair, small eyes, slight
limbed, not strong, 229 -- sixth the Europeans and bordering nations, white of
different tints, fine hair, large limbed, vigorous, ii. 230, 231 -- endures a
greater variety of climates than the lower orders are able to do, and why, i.
319 -- may be called the animal of every climate, ii. 9 -- intended naturally
to be white, ii. 233 -- white men resemble our common parent more than the rest
of his children, ii. 239 -- a native of the tropical climates, and only a
sojourner more to the north, according to Linnaeus -- argument sufficient to
prove the contrary, ii. 240 -- marriageable in the warm countries of India at
twelve and thirteen years of age, ii. 71 -- just come into the world gives a
picture of complete imbecility, ii. 52 -- vain man ventures to excite an
auditor's attention, at the risk of incurring his dislike, ii. 99 -- as man has
a superiority of powers over other animals, so is he proportionably inferior to
them in his necessities -- nature has made him subject to more wants and
infirmities than other creatures; but all these wants seem given to multiply
the number of his enjoyments -- and in what manner, ii. 123 -- first sensations
of a man newly brought into existence, and the steps by which he arrives at
reality pointed out by Mr. Buffon, ii. 187 -- in those countries where men are
most barbarous and stupid, there brutes are most active and sagacious, iv. 231
-- the only animal that supports himself perfectly erect -- the buttock, in
man, different from that of all other animals -- man's feet also different from
those of other animals, the apes not excepted -- the nails less in man than in
any animal, ii. 105 -- said to be tall when from five feet eight inches to six
feet high, ii. 108 -- probability that men have been, in all ages, much of the
same size they are at present -- many corroborating proofs of this, ii. 265 --
generally lives to ninety or a hundred years, if not cut off by diseases -- how
men lived so much longer in earlier times than at present, ii. 203 --
proportionably stronger for his size than any other animal -- to compare the
strength of the lion with that of man, it must be considered the claws of the
animal give a false idea of its power; and ascribe to its force the effects of
its arms -- another manner of comparing the strength of man with that of
animals, is by the weights which either can carry, ii. 111 -- Dr. Desaguliers
speaks of a man able to raise two thousand pounds, by distributing the weights
in such manner that every part of his body bore its share, ii. 112 -- exercised
in running, outstrips horses; a stout walker, in a journey, walks down a horse,
ii. 114 -- those employed as messengers at Ispahan in Persia, runners by
profession, go thirty-six leagues in fourteen hours, ii. 114 -- every animal
endures the wants of sleep and hunger with less injury to health than man, ii.
124 -- he cannot, uninjured, live four days without eating, drinking, and
sleeping, ii. 125 -- one said to live without food for seven days, ii. 132 --
requires sleep for double motives, the refreshment of the mental as well as the
bodily frame, ii. 134 -- more difficult for man than any other animal to
procure sleep, ii. 136 -- has a lump upon the windpipe, not to be seen in
woman, ii. 102 -- a young man deaf and dumb from his birth, knew nothing of
death, and never thought of it till the age of twenty-four, when he began to
speak all of a sudden, ii. 176 -- account of a man ruminating, iii. 6, 7 --
one, without hands or legs, by practice used his stumps for the most convenient
purposes, and performed astonishing feats of dexterity, iv. 250 -- man dies
under wounds which a quadruped or a bird could easily survive, viii. 170
Manufactures, the woollen manufacture not carried on here till several ages
after sheep were propagated in England, iii. 43 -- unavailing efforts of our
kings to introduce and preserve it -- the Flemings possessed the art in a
superior degree -- the inhabitants of the Netherlands improved us in this art,
and when, iii. 43, 44 -- the woollen manufacture supposed for some time
decaying amongst us, iii. 44 -- of stuffs of the wool of the pacos, a
considerable branch of commerce in South America, iv. 317 Manati, may
indiscriminately be the last of beasts, or the first of fishes -- its
description -- the female has breasts placed foreward, like those of women --
the tongue so short, some have pretended it has one, iv. 183, 184 -- never
entirely leaves the water, only advances the head out of the stream, to reach
the grass on the river sides -- it feeds entirely on vegetables, iv. 184, 185
-- places where found -- graze among turtles and other crustaceous fishes,
giving or fearing no disturbance -- unmolested, they keep together in large
companies, and surround their young -- bring forth in autumn; and supposed to
go with young eighteen months -- the manati has no voice nor cry -- its
intestines are longer, in proportion, than those of any other creature, the
horse excepted -- the fat which lies under the skin, exposed to the sun, has a
fine smell and taste, and exceeds the fat of any sea animal, iv. 185 -- the
heat of the sun does not make it rancid; it tastes like the oil of sweet
almonds, and serves every way instead of butter; any quantity may be taken
inwardly, having no other effect than to keep the body open -- the fat of the
tail, boiled, more delicate than the former -- the lean takes a long time in
boiling, and eats like beef -- the fat of the young like pork, and the lean
like veal, iv. 186 Mandril, the largest of the baboon kind -- its description
-- when displeased, weeps like a child -- is a native of the Gold Coast, iv.
214 Mangabey, a monkey of the ancient continent -- its description, iv. 234
Mangrove-tree, that grows down in the water of the Senegal river, i. 220
Manks-Puffin, or coulterneb, a small waterfowl -- described, vi. 199 to 105
Manyfold, name of the third stomach of ruminating animals, ii. 4 Map of the
bottom of that sea which lies between Africa and America, given by M. Buache,
i. 290 Marcasites, their composition -- experiment by way of proof, i. 76, 77
Mares, their exportation prohibited by a law in Arabia, ii. 353 -- studs in
Persia of ten thousand white mares, with hoofs so hard, that shoeing is
unnecessary, ii. 355 -- a law in England, prohibiting the exportation of mares
and stallions; and one similar to this obtained so early as the times of
Athelstan, ii. 369 Marikina, a monkey of the sagoin kind, with a mane round the
neck, and a bunch of hair at the end of the tail, like a lion, iv. 237
Mariners, to multiply their numbers, queen Elizabeth enjoined that her subjects
should fast from flesh on Fridays and Saturdays, ii. 131 Marle, different sorts
found in a well dug at Marly, i. 57 Marmose, only differs in size from the
oppossum, being less; instead of the bag to receive the young, has only two
longitudinal folds, within which the premature young, continue to suck -- when
first produced not above the size of a bean; but stick to the teat until they
arrive at maturity, iv. 247 Marmout, or marmotte, a ruminating animal, iii. 5
-- a native of the Alps -- its description -- is easily tamed, readily taught
to dance, weild a stick, and obey the voice of its master, iv. 38 -- it has an
antipathy to the dog -- strength and agility -- ludicrous saying that the
Savoyards, the only chimney-sweepers of Paris, have learned their art from the
marmotte they carry about for show -- is apt to gnaw the furniture -- other
affections of this animal -- its food -- is cleanly, but has a disagreeable
scent -- sleeps during winter, iv. 39 to 41 -- form of its hole resembles the
letter Y, iv. 42 -- manner of making it, iv. 41 -- they live together, and work
in common to make their habitations snug and convenient -- when they venture
abroad, one is placed as a sentinel upon a lofty rock, iv. 43 -- Mr. Buffon
says it does not sleep during winter, is rather in a torpor, a stagnation of
all faculties -- its heat not more than ten degrees above congelation, iv. 45
-- the flesh said to have a wild taste, and to cause vomiting -- countries
where it is found, iv. 48 -- inhabitants of the Alps do not till winter open
its hole -- produces but once a year, and brings forth three or four at a time
-- they grow fast, and their lives are not above nine or ten years, iv. 47
Marriage and consummation of the Indians, the husband at ten years old, and the
wife at eight; frequently have children at that age, ii. 224 Marriotte, his
experiment proves that water acts as a menstruum upon air, i. 369 Marrow,
spinal, and the brain, the first seen as begun in the embryo, ii. 146 Marsigli
(count) his opinion upon corals and spunges, viii. 193 Martin, its description,
iii. 367, 368 -- the most beautiful of all British beasts of prey -- its scent
a pleasing perfume, iii. 367 -- the yellow-breasted martin -- its fur more
valuable than the white-breasted sort -- Mr. Buffon supposes them a distinct
species, that distinction unnecessary, iii. 368 -- of all the weasel kind the
most pleasing, iii. 368, 369 -- feeds as they do, and is fond of honey, iii.
358 -- seldom meets the wild-cat without a combat, iii. 369 -- the wild-cat not
a match for the martin -- kept tame by Gesner and Mr. Buffon -- often slept for
two days, and then was two or three days without sleeping -- the
yellow-breasted penetrating, is likely to be the menstruum of one less so --
Marriotte's experiment shows that water will act as a menstruum upon air, i.
369 -- cold diminishes the force of menstruums, and often promotes evaporation,
i. 370 Merlin, the smallest of the hawk or falcon-kind, scarce larger than a
thrush, displays a degree of courage rendering him formidable to birds far
above his size -- kills a partridge or a quail at a single pounce from above,
v. 122 -- the pursuit of the lark by a couple of merlins is a most delightful
spectacle, v. 128 Merolla says the zebra, when tamed, is not less estimable for
swiftness than beauty, ii. 397 Metals, the richest, in their native state, less
glittering and splendid than useless marcasites, i. 74, 75 -- those trades that
deal in their preparations, always unwholesome, i. 326 -- all pieces swallowed
by animals lose part of their weight, and often the extremities of their
figure, v. 55 Meteors, between the tropics, and near the poles, assume dreadful
and various appearances, i. 377 -- in those countries where the sun exerts the
greatest force in raising vapors, there are the greatest quantity of meteors,
i. 378 -- one of a very uncommon kind, seen by Ulloa, at Quito, i. 383 Method,
the principal help in natural history; without it little progress made in this
science, ii. 289 -- the most applauded of classing animals, ii. 294 -- the
author's method of classing them, ii. 301 -- that of describing all things by
words alone, a fault that has infected most of our dictionaries, and bodies of
arts and sciences, ii. 307, 308 -- Mr. Lock has observed, that a drawing of an
animal, taken from life, is the best method of advancing natural history, ii.
307 Mew, said of stags when they cast their heads, iii. 114 Mice, have burrowed
in the back of hogs, while fattening in the sty, without being felt, iii. 178
-- and rats cannot endure the scent of the genett, iii. 388 -- in 1580, at
Hallontide, an army of mice over run the marshes near Southminster, and eat up
the grass to the roots; but soon after they were all devoured by a number of
strange painted owls, v. 146 Mico, the least and most beautiful monkey of the
sagoin kind -- its description by Mr. La Condamine, iv. 237. 238 Microscope,
increases the magnitude of an object, and that of its motion also, ii. 21 --
the pupil and humors of the eye of the mole discovered by it, iv. 92 Migrating
fishes, vi. 324 -- the herring and the pilchard take the most adventurous
voyages, vi. 326 -- stated returns, and regular progress of the migrating
fishes, one of the most extraordinary circumstances in the history of nature,
vi. 324 Migration, causes of migrations of birds, v. 32 -- in what manner they
perform them, v. 35 -- at what times, v. 32 -- rather follow weather than
country, and go on as they perceive the atmosphere more suitable to their wants
and dispositions, v. 36, 37 -- migration of some swallows, and retreat of
others into old walls, to avoid the rigor of winter, wrap this subject in
great obscurity, v. 37 -- of bees, several signs previous to it, viii. 82
Milan, hares bred in the Milanese, thought the best in Europe, iv. 13 Milk,
infants have it in their own breasts, ii. 59 -- sometimes found in the breasts
of men, as well as in those of women, ii. 102 -- in carnivorous animals more
sparing than in others, ii. 337, and iii. 366 -- of goats medicinal, and not
apt to curdle upon the stomach as that of the cows, iii. 55 -- of the reindeer
thinner than that of the cow, but sweeter, and more nourishing, iii. 158 --
boiled up with wood sorrel, by the Laplanders kept in casks under ground, to be
eaten in winter, iii. 166 -- injected into a vein, kills with more certainty
than the venom of a viper, vii. 199, 200 Millipedes multiplied by being cut in
pieces, ii. 23 Milo, an instance of his strength, when he stood upright, ii.
118 Milton makes Satan personate the cormorant, a most nauseous bird --
objection against him on this account -- his vindication, vi. 66 Minerals mere
inactive and insensible bodies, ii. 4 Miners first become paralytic, then die
consumptive, for the trifling reward of seven-pence a day, i. 79 -- peculiar
contrivance to supply light for their operations -- make use only of wooden
instruments in digging, and take out the nails from their shoes before they
enter the mine, i. 82 Mines, the deepest that at Cotteberg in Hungary, not more
than three thousand feet deep, i. 51 -- a coal-mine in the North of England
said to be eleven hundred yards deep, i. 73 -- air different in them,
proportionably as the magazines of fire lay nearer the center, i. 75 -- other
causes of this difference, i. 76 -- Mendip lead-mines in Somersetshire -- their
description, i. 77, 78 -- mines of coal generally less noxious than those of
tin; tin than those of copper; but none are so dreadfully destructive as those
of quicksilver, i. 78 -- deplorable infirmities of workmen in the mines near
the village of Idra, i. 79 -- metallic, often destroy all vegetation by their
volatile corrosive fumes -- salt mines naturally cold, i. 83 -- natives of
countries abounding in mines too often experience the noxious effects of their
vicinity, i. 326 -- in a lead-mine in Flintshire were found two grinding teeth,
and part of the tusk of an elephant, at forty-two yards depth, iv. 282
Mingrelians, among the sixth variety of the human species, described, ii. 230
Mint, cats excessively fond of the cat-mint, iii. 206 Mire-drum, the bittern,
described, vi. 2 to 5. See Bittern. Misletoe, a plant thought propagated by
seeds voided by birds, v. 316 Mississippi, a great river in North America, i.
216 -- its source and length -- receives forty rivers, i. 218 Mists continually
rise upon approach of the winter months, under the line, i. 378 -- called frost
smoke, raises blisters on several parts of the body, in the regions round the
poles, i. 386 Mite-fly, not found in Lapland, iii. 166 Miume, a river in
America -- enormous skeletons lately discovered near it, iv. 282 Mock-bird,
description of the American mock-bird, v. 324 -- its habits -- can assume the
tone of every animal in the wood, from the wolf to the raven -- no bird in the
forest it has not at times deceived by mimicking its call, v. 325 Mock-suns,
meteors and other phoenomena, in the northern regions, i. 377, 388 Mococo,
first of the maki-kind, which is the last of the monkies -- its description --
a native of Madagascar -- its qualities, iv. 239, 240 -- eats its own tail, and
seems to feel no pain -- some other monkies do the same, iv. 336, 337 Modena, a
city in Italy -- its remarkable wells -- other rarities round it, i. 282 Mogul,
in the Indian language signifies a white man, ii. 224 Mold, black, or
garden-earth, the first layer on the surface of the globe -- is formed from
animal and vegetable bodies decayed -- soil fertile, in proportion to the
quantity that putrified mold bears to the gravelly mixture, i. 52, 53 Mole, a
ruminating insect, or seemingly so, iii. 6 -- no quadruped fatter, none with a
more sleek glossy skin -- an utter stranger in Ireland -- formed to live under
the earth, iv. 90, 91 -- its description, 91 to 95 -- the ancients, and some
moderns, of opinion, that the mole was blind; but Derham, by a microscope,
discovered all the parts of the eye known in other animals, iv. 92 -- a mole
let loose in the midst of a field, like a ghost on a theater, instantly sinks
into the earth; and an active labourer, with a spade, pursues it in vain, iv.
93 -- peculiar advantage of the smallness of its eyes, iv. 94 -- when once
buried in the earth, it seldom stirs out -- it chooses the looser softer grounds
-- chiefly preys upon worms and insects -- is most active, and casts up most
earth, immediately before rain, and in winter, before a thaw -- in dry weather,
it seldom forms hillocks -- readily evades the pursuit of animals stronger and
swifter than itself -- its greatest calamity is an inundation -- in some places
considered by the farmer as his greatest pest -- couples toward spring, and
the young found about the beginning of May -- generally four or five at a time,
v. 96 -- description of the molehill, in which the female has brought forth
her young, iv. 97 -- is scarcely found, except in cultivated countries -- the
varieties are but few -- that of Virginia is black, mixed with a deep purple --
that of Poland is white -- Agricola says he saw hats made of mole-skins, the
finest and most beautiful imaginable, iv. 98 Molossian breed of dogs, and its
perfections, set forth by Nemesianus, iii. 294 Molting, annually suffered by
birds -- its effects, v. 18 -- artificially accelerated, and how -- the manner
in which nature performs the operation, v. 19 -- the season commonly obtains
from the end of summer to the middle of autumn, v. 20 Molucca islands,
Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese of noble extraction, slain upon one of them,
ii. 260 Mona, the cephus of the ancients, a monkey of the ancient continent --
its description, iv. 234 Mona, name given to the marmout in Canada, iv. 48
Mongooz, of the maki-kind, the last of the monkies -- its description -- is a
native of Madagascar, iv. 240 Monkey, one general description will not serve
for all the animals of the monkey-kind, iv. 189 -- La Condamine asserts it
would take up a volume to describe the differences of monkies found along the
river of Amazons, iv. 216 -- and we are sure that every one of these is
different from those on the African coast, iv. 217 -- an elaborate description
of each must be useless and tiresome, their numbers being very great, and their
differences very trifling -- those of two cantons never found to mix -- of all
kinds less than the baboon, have less power of doing mischief, and their
ferocity diminishes with their size, iv. 217, 218 -- do nothing desired without
beating; their fears once removed, they are the most insolent headstrong
animals in nature -- in their native woods, are the pests of other animals, and
the masters of the forest where they reside -- the tiger, nor the lion will not
venture to dispute dominion with creatures, who from the tops of trees with
impunity carry on an offensive war, and by their agility escape all pursuit,
iv. 219 -- yet they sometimes fall a prey to the lion in deserts and forests,
iii. 223, 224 -- birds have not less to fear from their continual depredations
-- such being their petulant delight in mischief, that they fling the eggs
against the ground when wanting appetite to devour them, iv. 219 -- one only
animal in the forest ventures to oppose them, that is the serpent -- larger
snakes often wind up the trees where they reside, and happening to surprise
them sleeping, swallow them whole, before they can make defense -- they
generally inhabit the tops of trees, and the snakes cling to the branches
nearer the bottom, in this manner they are near each other, like enemies in the
same field of battle -- some supposed their vicinity rather argued mutual
friendship -- father Labat has seen them playing their gambols upon those
branches on which the snakes were reposing, and jumping over them without
receiving any injury, iv. 220 -- they provoke the snake as the sparrows twitter
at a cat -- when attacked, they show perfect skill in defending and assisting
each other -- they regularly begin hostilities against those who enter their
woods, iv. 221 -- they take most desperate leaps, and seldom come to the ground
-- one being wounded, the rest come round, put their fingers into the wound, as
desirous of sounding its depth -- the blood flowing in any quantity, some stop
it, while others get leaves, chew, and thrust them into the opening -- are
often killed in numbers before they make a retreat, with the same precipitation
as they at first came on -- in this retreat the young are clinging to the back
of the female, who jumps away, seemingly unembarrassed by the burden, iv. 222
-- usual way of taking them alive -- the monkey not killed outright, does not
fall; but clinging to some branch, continues, when dead, its last grasp, and
remains where shot, until it drops by putrefaction, iv. 223 -- skinned and
served up at negroe-feasts, so like a child, an European is shocked at the
sight, iv. 224 -- the negroes seeing Europeans buy young and tame monkies, with
equal care brought rats to the factors for sale, and were greatly disappointed
finding no purchaser -- negroes cannot comprehend advantages arising from
educating or keeping animals who come in companies to lay waste fields of corn
or rice, or plantations of sugarcanes -- they carry off what they are able,
and destroy ten times more, iv. 224, 225 -- manner of their plundering -- are
under a kind of discipline, exercised among themselves, iv. 225 -- account to
this purpose by Morgrave -- one species, by Mr. Buffon called the ouarine,
remarkable for loudness and distinctness of voice -- use to which they convert
it -- are generally together in companies, march in exact order, and obey the
voice of some chieftain, remarkable for his size and gravity, iv. 226 -- chief
food of the tribe, iv. 227 -- extraordinary manner of managing an oyster --
manner of drawing crabs from the water, -- no snare, how nicely baited, takes a
monkey of the West Indian islands -- female brings forth one, and sometimes two
at a time -- rarely breed when brought into Europe -- the male and female never
tired of fondling their young, and instruct it with no little assiduity --
often severely correct it, if stubborn, or disinclined to profit by their
example -- manner of carrying their young in the woods, iv. 227, 228 --
dexterity in passing from one tree to another, by forming a kind of chain,
locking tail in tail, or hand in hand, iv. 229 -- one amused itself for hours
imposing upon the gravity of a cat -- and playing its pranks among rabbits, iv.
230 -- faithful services which father Carli received from the monkies in
Angola, where he went to convert the savage natives to Christianity -- savages
of Africa and America, suppose monkies to be men; idle, slothful, rational
beings, capable of speech and conversa- but obstinately dumb, for fear of being
compelled to labor -- monkies of Africa most expert and entertaining, iv. 231
-- show a greater degree of cunning and activity -- three marks by which
monkies of the new continent are distinguished from those of the old, iv. 232
-- Mr. Buffon makes but nine species of monkies belonging to the ancient
continent, and eleven to the new -- their names, with their descriptions, iv.
232 to 238 -- the red African, the patas, second sort of the ancient continent,
iv. 233 -- the white nose, or moustoc, of the ancient continent, most
beautiful, its description -- the green of St. Jago, also called callitrix, is
of the ancient continent -- its description, iv. 234 -- some of the kinds eat
their own tail, and seem to feel no pain, iv. 336 -- the Bramins have hospitals
for those that happen to be sick, or disabled, iv. 234 -- those monkies of the
new continent with muscular holding tails, are called sapajous, and those with
feeble useless tails, are called sagoins, iv. 235 -- the fox-tailed monkey, iv.
237 -- makies, the last of the kind -- their description, iv. 238
Monkey-bezoar, a factitious concrete, iii. 76. See Bezoar. Monoculus, the
arborescent water-flea -- its description -- are of a blood-red color; and
sometimes in such multitudes on standing waters, as to make them appear all
over red, whence the water has been thought turned into blood, vii. 288 -- its
branching arms, and the motion made with them in the water, deserve great
attention, vii. 289 Monsoons, so called from a famous pilot of that name, who
first used them in navigation with success -- in that part of the ocean between
Africa and India those of the east winds begin in January, and end at the
commencement of June; in August, or September, the contrary takes place; and
the west winds blow for three or four months, i. 347 -- monsoons prevail, at
different seasons, throughout the Indies, i. 348 Monsters, after a catalogue of
them, Linnaeus particularly adds the slender waists of the women of Europe, ii.
243 Monstrous productions, father Malbranche's ingenious theory of, ii. 246 --
remarkable instance related by him, ii. 245 Montaigne, well known to have
disliked those men who shut one eye in looking upon an object, ii. 94
Moose-deer, name in America for the elk, iii. 140 -- its description, iii. 144,
145 Mormyrus, description of this fish, vi. 315 Morocco, the original horses
there, much smaller than than the Arabian breed, ii. 361 Moron, a kind of
salamander, thought venomous, vii. 141 Morse, an animal of the seal-kind, might
be ranked among the fishes, ii. 313 -- generally frequents the same places
where seals reside in, iv. 181 -- different from the rest in a very particular
formation of the teeth -- resembles a seal, except that it is much larger --
are rarely found, but in the frozen regions near the pole -- formerly more
numerous than at present; the Greenlanders destroyed them more before those
seas were visited by European ships upon the whale-fishery, than now, iv. 181
-- its teeth generally from two to three feet long -- the ivory more esteemed
than that of the elephant -- the fishers have formerly killed three or four
hundred morses at once; their bones are still lying in prodigious quantities,
along those shores they chiefly frequented, iv. 182 Moschitoes, excessive
torments caused by them, i. 147 -- houses forsaker on account of them, i. 148
Moss, the only support of the reindeer in Lapland -- of two sorts, white and
black, iii. 154 Mother-of pearl, taken from the pearl oyster, vii. 55 Moths,
difference from butterflies, viii. 38 -- all the tribe of female moths lay
their eggs soon after they leave the aurelia, viii. 42 Motion, keeps the water
of the sea sweet, i. 249 -- destroys numbers of viler creatures, i. 250 --
constant motion of the waters of the sea westward, i. 259 -- principal
difference between serpentine and vermicular motion, vii. 181 -- some
vegetables possessed of motion, viii. 161 -- and many animals totally without
it -- in what manner animals of the worm kind move, viii. 166 Moufflon, the
sheep in a savage state, a bold, fleet creature, able to escape from greater
animals, or oppose the smaller with arms received from nature, iii. 39 -- its
description, iii. 50 Mountains, how formed, and for what designed, i. 138 to
140 -- upon our globe considered as angles of small lines in the circumference
of a circle, i. 139 -- give direction to the courses of the air, i. 338 --
rising from places once level, i. 21 -- countries most mountainous, are most
barren and unhabitable, i. 146 -- some valleys are fertilized by earth washed
down from great heights, i. 162 -- the more extensive the mountain, the greater
the river, i. 142 -- tops of the highest mountains bare and pointed, and why,
i. 155 -- tops of land-mountains appear barren and rocky; of sea-mountains
verdant and fruitful, i. 290 -- the highest in Africa, those called of the
moon, giving source to the Niger and Nile in Africa, the greatest and highest
under the line, i. 142, 146 -- some rise three miles perpendicular above the
bottom of the ocean, 146, 153 -- highest in Asia; mount Caucasus makes near
approaches to the Andes in South America, i. 153 -- burning in Europe, i. 89 --
in Asia, i. 98 -- in the Molucca islands -- in Africa -- in America, those of
the Andes -- those of Arequipa, Carassa, Malahallo and Cotopaxi, i. 99 --
description of the latter by Ulloa; and an eruption of it, i. 100 Mouse, the
most feeble, and most timid of all quadrupeds, except the Guinea-pig, iv. 72 --
never rendered quite familiar; though fed in a cage, retains its apprehensions
-- no animal has more enemies, and few so incapable of resistance -- the owl,
cat, snake, hawk, weasel, and rat destroy them by millions -- brings forth at
all seasons, and several times in the year; its usual number from six to ten --
these in a fortnight strong enough to shift for themselves -- places where
chiefly found -- Aristotle, having put a mouse with young into a vessel of
corn, some time after found an hundred and twenty sprung from that original,
iv. 73 -- its life lasts two or three years -- the species found in all parts
of the ancient continent, and has been exported to the new -- Gesner minutely
describes the variety of mouse-traps -- long-tailed field-mouse, iv. 74 --
short-tailed field-mouse -- has a store against winter, a bushel at a time -- a
description of the shrew-mouse, iv. 75 Moustoc, or white-nose, monkey of the
ancient continent; a beautiful little animal -- its description iv. 234 Mouth
of hares lined with hair -- the only animals that have it on the inside, iv. 8
-- the snails of the trochus kind have none, vii. 33 -- mouth of garden, water,
and sea-snails, vii. 32 Mucous liquor, giving the joints an easy and ready
play, ii. 196 Mugil, the mullet, description of this fish, vi. 310 Mule,
engendered between a horse and a she-ass, or a jack-ass and a mare, ii. 386 --
reputed barren, though Aristotle says it is sometimes prolific, ii. 375 --
inhabitants of mountainous countries cannot do without them -- how they go down
the precipices of the Alps and Andes -- a fine mule in Spain worth fifty or
sixty guineas -- common mule very healthy -- lives thirty years and more, ii.
387 -- in South America destroyed by a bat called vampyre, iv. 145 Mullus, or
surmulet, description of this fish, vi. 308 Multivalve shells, third division
of shells by Aristotle, vii. 12 -- two principal kinds of multivalve
shellfish, moving and stationary, vii. 61 Mummy, formerly a considerable
article in medicine, ii. 278 -- Paraeus wrote a treatise on the inefficacy of
mummy in physic -- counterfeited by the Jews, and how -- the method of seeking
for mummies, ii. 279 -- found in the sands of Arabia, in Egypt, in wooden
coffins, or in clothes covered with bitumen, ii. 275, 277, 280 -- remarkable
mummy dug up at Auvergne, in France, ii. 283 -- an injection of petreoleum
inwardly, and a layer of asphaltum without, suffice to make a mummy, ii. 287
Muraena, the eel, its description, vi. 311 Murena of the ancients, not our
lamprey, vi. 269 Muralto, has given the anatomy of the lamprey, but made no
mention of lungs, vi. 271 Muscardin, name of the less dormouse by Mr. Buffon,
iv. 76 Muscles, to judge of the strength of animals by the thickness of their
muscles inconclusive, ii. 120 -- those of the hare are strong and without fat,
iv. 4 -- the pectoral muscles of quadrupeds trifling in comparison to those of
birds -- in quadrupeds, as in man, the muscles moving the thighs and hinder
parts are strongest, while those of the arms are feeble -- in birds, the
contrary obtains, v. 8 -- those of the shark preserve their motion after being
separated from the body, vi. 244 Muscle, the shellfish, its description -- its
organs of generation are what most deserve to excite our curiosity, vii. 42 --
it endeavors to become stationary, and to attach itself to any fixed object it
happens to be near -- its enemies, vii. 44 -- it is supposed that those
threads, which are usually called the beard of the muscle, are the natural
growth of the animal's body, and by no means produced at pleasure, as Reaumur
supposes, vii. 45 -- its instrument of motion, by which it contrives to reach
the object it wants to bind itself to -- its food -- some of this kind have
been found a foot long, vii. 46 -- the natives of Palermo sometimes make gloves
and stockings of its beards -- the places where found -- it requires a year for
the peopling a muscle-bed, vii. 47 Muscovy-duck, or the musk-duck, so called
from a supposed musky smell, vi. 130 Music, said, by the ancients, to have been
invented from the blows of different hammers on an anvil, ii. 165 -- from the
remains of ancient music, collected by Meibomius, one might suppose nothing
powerful in what is lost, ii. 169 -- in all countries, where music is in its
infancy, the half tones are rejected, ii. 166 -- many barbarous nations have
their instruments of music; and the proportion between their notes is the same
as in ours -- all countries pleased with music; and where they have not skill
to produce harmony, they substitute noise, ii. 167 -- its effects, the ancients
give us many strange instances of them upon men and animals, ii. 168 -- and the
moderns likewise, ii. 169 -- madness cured by it -- and also excited by it --
remarkable instance in Henry IV. of Denmark, ii. 170 -- it is now well known
that the stories of the bite of the tarantula, and its cure by music, are all
deceptions -- instance of it, ii. 171 -- fishes are allured by music -- horses
and cows likewise, ii. 168, 169 -- the elephant appears delighted with music,
iv. 258 -- father Kircher has set the voices of birds to music, v. 143 Musk, a
doubt whether the animal producing it be a hog, an ox, a goat, or a deer, iii.
89 -- no animal so justly the reproach of natural historians as that which
bears the musk, iii. 88 -- it has been variously described, and is known very
imperfectly, iii. 90 -- the description given by Grew, iii. 90, 91 -- among the
numerous medicines procurable from quadrupeds, none, except the musk and
hartshorn, have preserved a degree of reputation, iii. 69 -- formerly in high
request as a perfume, iii. 93 -- has for more than a century been imported from
the East, iii. 88 -- is a dusky reddish substance, like coagulated blood -- a
grain of it perfumes a whole room -- its odor continues for days, without
diminution, and no substance known has a stronger or more permanent smell, iii.
89 -- in larger quantity it continues for years; and scarce wasted in weight,
although it has filled the atmosphere to a great distance with its parts, iii.
90 -- the bags of musk from abroad supposed to belong to some other animal, or
taken from some part of the same, filled with its blood and enough of the
perfume to impregnate the rest, iii. 92 -- it comes from China, Tonquin,
Bengal, and often from Muscovy -- that of Thibet reckoned the best, and of
Muscovy the worst, iii. 93 Musk-rat, three distinctions of it, iv. 78 -- it is
called stinkard by the savages of Canada, iv. 80 Musky smell, does not make the
characteristic marks of any kind of animals, iii. 32 Musmon, or mufflon,
resembles a ram, its description, iii. 49, 50 Myoides, a broad thin skin
covering the whole upper forepart of the body, its effect in women with child,
ii. 104
N.
Nails, how formed in man, ii. 101 -- those of some of the learned men in China
longer than their fingers -- savages that let them grow long, use them in
flaying animals, ii. 106 Nanquin, a river in Asia, receives thirty rivers, i.
217 Narwhal, the sea-unicorn -- its description, vi. 211 -- errors concerning
the teeth of this animal -- the most harmless and peaceful inhabitant of the
ocean -- the Greenlanders call it the forerunner of the whale; and why, vi.
212, 213 -- its food, vi. 214 -- is a gregarious animal -- a century ago its
teeth considered the greatest rarity in the world -- were believed to belong to
a very different animal, vi. 215 -- for some time after the narwhal was known,
the deceit was continued, vi. 216 -- they far surpass ivory in its qualities,
vi. 213 Natolian goat, a remarkable variety in the goat-kind, iii. 57 Nature
lavish of life in the lower orders of creation, ii. 49 -- has left no part of
her fabric destitute of inhabitants, v. 1 -- has brought man into life with
more wants and infirmities than the rest of her creatures, ii. 123 -- and by
supplying a variety of appetites, has multiplied life in her productions, v. 79
-- in a course of ages shapes herself to constraint, and assumes hereditary
deformity -- instances of it, ii. 238 -- has contracted the stomachs of animals
of the forest, suitable to their precarious way of living, ii. 124 -- what
might have led some late philosophers into the opinion that all nature was
animated, viii. 199 -- she has kindly hid our hearts from each other, to keep
us in good humor with our fellow creatures, ii. 95 Nautilus, a sea-snail, most
frequently seen swimming -- its shell very thin, and easily pierced, vii. 35 --
its description, vii. 36 -- it is certain that it sometimes quits its shell,
and returns to it again -- peculiarity for which it has been most
distinguished, vii. 37 Nazareth bird, whether the dodo or not, is uncertain, v.
78 Neck, fishes have none -- birds, in general, have it longer than any other
kind of animals, ii. 102 -- in women, it is proportionably longer than in men,
ii. 107 Nectarium, the part of a flower from which the honey is extracted,
viii. 75 Negroes of the Leeward islands, by the smell alone, distinguish the
footsteps of a Frenchman from those of a negroe, ii. 180 -- several of them
have white beards, and black hair -- described -- their features not deformed
by art, ii. 227 -- the women's breasts, after bearing one child, hang down
below the navel, and are thrown over the shoulder to suckle the child at their
backs, ii. 228 -- the jet black claim the honor of hereditary resemblance to
our common parent -- an argument sufficient to prove the contrary -- two white
negroes the issue of black parents, ii. 240 -- show their terror and surprise,
when they first see a horse, ii. 346 -- of the African coasts regard the bat
with horror, and will not eat it, though ready to starve, iv. 141 -- happy to
see numbers of monkies destroyed, because they dread their devastations, and
love their flesh, iv. 223 -- cannot comprehend advantages arising to Europeans
from educating or keeping monkies -- and having seen young and tame monkies
bought, have offered rats for sale to our factors, and been greatly
disappointed at finding no purchaser, iv. 224 -- distractedly fond of the flesh
of the shark, vi. 247 -- their manner of killing it, vi. 245 Negroland, or
Nigritia, the plague not known in it, i. 328 -- its inhabitants are the darkest
of all blacks, ii. 235 Nerves, wherever they go, or send their branches in
number, these parts are soonest begun, and most completely finished, ii. 146
Ness, or Nethe, a river near Bruges in Flanders -- great quantities of trees
found in its mouth, at the depth of fifty feet, i. 281 Nest, of every species
of birds has a peculiar architecture -- where eggs are numerous, the nest must
be warm, v. 24 -- different places which birds choose for their nests, v. 25 --
description of the nest of an eagle found in the Peak of Derbyshire, v. 93 --
of the bald eagle, large enough to fill the body of a cart, v. 96 -- hanging
nests in Brasil, v, 254 -- made in such manner, as to have no opening but at
the bottom, v. 256 -- the Chinese get those of the swallows from the rocks, and
sell them in great numbers in the East Indies, where they are esteemed great
delicacies, and eat dissolved in chicken, or mutton-broth, v. 350 -- that of
the wasp one of the most curious objects in natural history -- its description,
viii. 97 to 101 Netherlands, their inhabitants improved us in the woollen
manufacture, iii. 44 Nettles, how used to teach capons to clutch a fresh brood
of chickens throughout the year, v. 169 Nettles of the sea, name given by some
to the star-fish, viii. 175 New Providence, one of the Bahama islands -- the
Philosophical Transactions give account of poisonous qualities in the fish
found on the coast of this island -- all kinds at different times dangerous;
one day serving for nourishment, and the next proving fatal, vi. 349 Nicola
Pesce, a celebrated diver -- his performances related by Kircher, i. 293 -- he
often swam over from Sicily into Calabria, carrying letters from the king --
frequently known to spend five days in the midst of the waves, without any
other provisions than the fish he caught there, and ate raw, i 294 Nieper, or
Boristhenes, a river rising in the middle of Muscovy, and running three hundred
and fifty leagues to empty itself in the Black Sea, i. 210 Niger, this river
has a course of several hundred miles from its source, at the mountains of the
moon, i. 142 -- confidently asserted that it is lost before it reaches the
ocean, i. 225 Nightingale, a bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 314 -- description of
its melody by Pliny, v. 326 -- its residence -- for weeks together,
undisturbed, it sits upon the same tree, v. 328 -- its nest, and eggs, v. 328
-- its long in captivity not so alluring, v. 329 -- Gesner says it is possessed
of a faculty of talking -- story related by him in proof of this assertion, v.
329 to 332 -- its food, and in what manner they must be kept, v. 336 to 337 --
manner of catching the nightingale, and managing them when caught, v. 337, 338
-- the black-cap called by some the mock-nightingale, v. 335 Nile, its course,
i. 212 -- its sources ascertained by missionaries -- takes its rise in the
kingdom of Goiam -- receives many lesser rivers -- Pliny mistaken, in saying
that it received none, i. 213 -- the cause of its annual overflowings -- time
of their increase and decrease more inconsiderable now than in the time of the
ancients, i. 214 Noise, the mind predisposed to joy, noise fails not to
increase it into rapture -- and those nations which have not skill enough to
produce harmony, readily substitute noise -- loud and unexpected, disturbs the
whole frame; and why, ii. 167 Noort (Oliver Van) a traveller who confirms the
existence of giants, ii. 261 Norfolk, along its coasts, the sea has gained
fifty yards in some places, and lost as much in others, i. 277 Norway, the last
history of that kingdom does not intimate that asses have yet reached that
country, ii. 385 -- the isatis, a species between the dog and the fox, found in
this country, iii. 340 -- the first great bank for herrings was along these
shores, vi. 331 -- there are lands in it at one time covered with water, and
another free, i. 279 -- the sea has formed several little islands from its main
land, i. 278 Nose, that of the Grecian Venus such as would appear at present an
actual deformity, ii. 76 -- the form of the nose, and its advanced position,
peculiar to the human visage -- among the tribes of savage men, the nose is
very flat -- a Tartar seen in Europe with little more than two holes through
which to breathe, ii. 89 -- whence originally may have come the flat noses of
the blacks, ii. 239 Nostrils, wide, add a great deal to the bold and resolute
air of the countenance, ii. 89 -- of the cetaceous tribe, vi. 186 -- two in the
great Greenland whale, vi. 197 Note of the sloth, according to Kircher, an
ascending and descending hexachord, uttered only by night, iv. 347 Notonecta,
the common water-fly -- swims on its back, to feed on the under-side of plants
growing in water, vii. 359 Numbness produced by the touch and shock of the
torpedo described, vi. 262 -- conjectures concerning the cause of it, vi. 264,
265 -- more fish than this of the ray-kind, possessed of the numbing quality --
this quality said to continue in one kind of torpedo after it is dead; and the
very skin possessed of this extraordinary power till it becomes dry, vi. 267
Numidia, the plague not known in it once in an hundred years, i. 328 -- its
race of horses much degenerated, ii. 356 Numidian bird, or guinea-hen,
described, v. 192 Numidian crane -- its peculiar gestures and contortions, v.
391 Nux vomica, ground and mixed with meal, the most certain poison, and least
dangerous, to kill rats, iv. 70 -- fatal to most animals, except man, v. 170
Nyl-ghaw, an animal between the cow and the deer, native of India -- its
description, iv. 318 -- disposition and manners of one brought over to this
country, iv. 319 -- its manner of fighting -- at all our settlements in India
they are considered as rarities, iv. 320
O.
Oaks of Hatfield Chase Levels, as black as ebony, very lasting and close
grained, sold for fifteen pounds a piece, i. 285 Objects, we see them in an
inverted position, ii. 147 -- not the feeling only, but the color and
brightness of objects, contribute to form an idea of the distance at which they
appear, ii. 156 -- the power of seeing objects at a distance rarely equal in
both eyes, ii. 157 -- in near-sighted persons, the best eye sees every object
the largest, ii. 158 Oby, in Tartary, a river of five hundred leagues, running
from the lake of Kila into the Northern Sea, i. 210 -- receives above sixty
rivers, i. 217 Ocean occupies considerably more of the globe than the land, i,
227 -- its different names -- all the rivers in the world flowing into it,
would, upon a rude computation, take eight hundred years to fill it to its
present height, i. 228 -- the bays, gulphs, currents and shallows of it much
better known and examined than the provinces and kingdoms of the earth, and
why, i. 233 -- opinions concerning its saltness, and that of Boil
particularly, i. 234 -- winds never change between the tropics in the Atlantic
and Ethiopic Oceans, i. 340 -- each has its insects, ii. 7 -- and its
vegetables, ii. 6 -- savages consider it as an angry deity, and pay it the
homage of submission, i. 231 -- when England loses its superiority there, its
safety begins to be precarious, i. 233 Ocelot, or cat-o'-mountain, its
description, iii. 255, 256 -- of the panther-kind -- one of the fiercest, and,
for its size, one of the most destructive animals in the world, iii. 262 -- its
unceasing appetite rather for the blood than the flesh of their prey, iii. 263
-- it generally is on the tops of trees, like our wild cats, iii. 264
Ocotzimtzcan, a kind of pigeon, one of the most splendid tenants of the Mexican
forests, v. 295 Odours diffused by the air as the fluid they swim in, i. 334
Ohio, several enormous skeletons five or six feet beneath the surface on the
banks of that river, lately discovered, iv. 282 Oil, train-oil the drink of the
Laplanders, ii. 216 -- the oil of the fish called cachelot is very easily
converted into spermaceti, vi. 220 -- the porpess yields a large quantity of
it, vi. 228 -- the liver of the shark affords three or four quarts of oil, vi.
247 -- by the the application of sallad-oil, the viper's bite is effectually
cured, vii. 206 Oker, the North-American Indians paint their skins with red
oker, ii. 236 Old man's-beard, a kind of moss growing in Brasil, v. 255
Olearius invited by the monarch of Persia to a sport of wild asses, ii. 377
Olive color, the Asiatic of that color claims the honor of hereditary
resemblance to our common parent -- an argument sufficient to prove the
contrary, ii. 240 Oliver Van Noort, a traveller, confirms the existence of
giants, ii. 261 Oliver (William) the first who discovered that the application
of sallad-oil cured the viper's bite effectually, vii. 206 Onager, or the wild
ass, is in still greater abundance than the wild horse, ii. 376 Ondatra, one of
the three distinctions of the musk-rat, iv. 78 -- a native of Canada -- creeps
into holes where others seemingly less cannot follow -- the female has two
distinct apertures, one for urine, the other for propagation -- this animal in
sorce measure resembles the beaver -- its manner of life during winter, in
houses covered under a depth of eight or ten feet of snow, iv. 78, 79 --
savages of Canada cannot abide its scent, call it stinkard -- its skin very
valuable, iv. 80 Onza, or ounce, of the panther-kind, iii. 254 -- the onza of
Linnaeus, iii. 255 Ophidium, the gilt-head, by sailors called the dolphin, its
description, vi. 305 Oppossum, an animal in North and South America, of the
size of a small cat, and of the monkey kind, iv. 148 -- its description, iv.
242 -- the female's belly found double -- when pursued, she instantly takes her
young into a false belly nature has given her, and carries them off, or dies in
the endeavor, ii. 336 -- a minute description of it -- the young, when first
produced are very small, and immediately on quitting the real womb, they creep
into the false one, but the time of continuance is uncertain -- Ulloa has found
five young hidden in the belly of the dam, alive and clinging to the teat,
three days after she was dead, iv. 243 to 245 -- chiefly subsists upon birds,
and hides among the leaves of trees, to seize them by surprise, iv. 246 --
cannot run with any swiftness, but climbs trees with great ease and expedition
-- it often hangs by the tail, and for hours together, with the head downwards,
keeps watching for its prey -- by means of its tail, flings itself from one
tree to another, hunts insects, and escapes its pursuers, iv. 246, 247 -- eats
vegetables as well as animal substances -- is easily tamed, but a disagreeable
domestic, from its stupidity, figure, and scent, which, though fragrant in
small quantities, is ungrateful when copious, iv. 247 -- during its gestation,
the bag in which the young are concealed may be opened and examined without
inconvenience; the young may be counted and handled; they keep fixed to the
teat, and cling as firm as if they made a part of the body of the mother, iv.
264 Orange-flowers, particularly grateful to the taste and smelling of the
elephant, iv. 259 Orb, description of the sea-orb, also called the
sea-porcupine -- is absolutely poisonous, if eaten, vi. 291 Ore of tin is
heavier than that of other metals, i. 74 -- the basest ores in general the most
beautiful to the eye, i. 75 Organs of digestion, in a manner, reversed in
birds, v. 16 Organs of generation in fishes, vi. 179 Orifices, or different
verges of snails, vii. 31 Original, French name of the American elk, iii. O144
Orkney Islands, on their shores, the sea, when agitated by storm, rises two
hundred feet perpendicular, i. 271 -- a law in those islands entitles any
person that kills an eagle to a hen out of every house in the parish in which
it is k^lled, v. 92 Oroonoko, a river in South America, its source and length,
i. 216 Ortolan, a bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 315 Osprey, its flesh is liked
by many, and, when young, an excellent food according to Belonius, v. 85 -- it
chiefly lives upon fish, v. 95 -- its distinctive marks, v. 98 Ostiac Tartars,
a race that have traveled down from the North, ii. 219 Ostracion, a fish of
the cartilaginous kind, is poisonous, vii. 291 Ostrich, the greatest of birds,
makes near approaches to the quadruped class, v. 40 -- its description --
appears as tall as a man on horseback -- brought into England above seven feet
high, v. 49 -- surprising conformation of its internal parts, v. 52 -- a native
only of the torrid regions of Africa -- its flesh proscribed in Scripture as
unfit to be eaten, v. 33 -- not known to breed elsewhere than where first
produced -- places they inhabit -- the Arabians say it never drinks -- will
devour leather, glass, hair, iron, stones, or any thing given, v. 54 -- in
native deserts, lead an innoffensive social life -- Thevenot afffirms the male
keeps to the female with connubial fidelity -- thought much inclined to venery
-- some of their eggs weigh fifteen pounds -- season for laying depends on the
climate where the animal is bred, v. 56 -- those birds very prolific, and lay
from forty to fifty eggs at one clutch -- none has a stronger affection for her
young, nor watches her eggs with greater assiduity, sit on them, like other
birds, male and female by turns, v. 57 -- assiduous in supplying the young with
grass, and careful to defend them, encountering every danger boldly -- way of
taking them among the ancients -- the plumes used in their helmets -- the
ladies of the East use them as ornaments in their dress -- plumes used in
Europe to decorate our hearses and hats -- feathers plucked from the animal
while alive more valued than those taken when dead, v. 58 -- some savage
nations of Africa hunt them for their flesh -- Heliogabalus had the brains of
six hundred dressed in one dish -- a single egg sufficient entertainment for
eight men -- eggs well tasted, and extremely nourishing -- Apicius gives a
receipt of sauce for the ostrich -- of all chaces, that of the ostrich, though
most laborious, the most entertaining, v. 59 -- manner in in which the Arabians
hunt them, ii. 348 and v. 60 -- use they make of its skin -- method of hunting
of the Struthophagi -- its blood mixed with the fat a great dainty with the
Arabians -- inhabitants of Dara and Lybia breed flocks of them, v. 61 -- tamed
with little trouble -- prized for more than feathers in this domestic state --
often ridden upon and used as horses -- Moore assures he saw a man at Joar
traveling upon an ostrich; and Adanson afsserts he had two young ostriches,
the strongest of which ran swifter than the best English racer, with two
negroes on his back, v. 62 -- an Arabian horse of the first speed scarcely
outruns them, ii. 348 -- of all animals using wings with legs in running, these
by far the swiftest, v. 60 -- parts of it convertible to medicinal purposes, v.
62 -- eggs, worst of all to be eaten according to Galen, v. 63 -- the American
ostrich, v. 64 Otter of roses, a modern perfume, valued for its vegetable
fragrance, iii. 394 Otter, the link between land and amphibious animals,
resembles terrestrial in make, and aquatic in living -- swims faster than it
runs -- is brown, and like an overgrown weasel -- its description, iv. 149, 150
-- voracious animal, found near lakes -- not fond of fishing in running water,
and why -- when in rivers, always swims against the stream, to meet rather than
pursue the fish it preys upon -- in lakes, destroys more than it devours, and
spoils a pond in a few nights -- tears to pieces the nets of the fishers, iv.
150 -- two different methods of fishing practiced by it -- infects the edges of
lakes with the dead fish it leaves, iv. 151 -- often distressed for provision
in winter, when lakes are frozen, and then obliged to live upon grass, weeds,
and bark of trees -- its retreat the hollow of a bank made by the water --
there it forms a gallery several yards along the water -- how it evades the
fowler, iv. 152 -- time of coupling -- description of its habitation, iv. 152,
153 -- way of training it up to hunt fish, and, at the word of command, drive
them up to the corner of a pond, seize the largest, and bring it in its mouth
to its master -- to take an old otter alive not easy -- few dogs dare to
encounter it, iv. 153 to 156 -- marks of its residence -- bites with great
fierceness, and never lets go its hold -- brings forth its young under hollow
banks upon beds of rushes, flags, or weeds, iv. 154 -- manner of taking the
young alive -- how fed when taken, iv. 155 -- continues long without food, iv.
152 -- couples about midsummer in Europe, and brings forth at nine weeks end,
three or four at a time, iv. 153 -- some dogs trained up to discover its
retreat, iv. 155 -- otters met with in most parts of the world -- in North
America and Carolina found white, inclining to yellow -- description of the
Brasilian otter, iv. 156, 157 Ovale, foramen, in the embryo, a passage for the
blood from the right cavity of the heart to the left and the great artery, ii.
45 -- it closes when the lungs begin their function, ii. 47 -- it never closes
in the seal's heart, iv. 171 Ovaria, two glandular bodies near the womb,
resembling the cluster of small eggs found in fowls, ii. 17 Ouarine species of
monkies so called by Mr. Buffon, remarkable for the loudness of their voice,
and the use to which they apply it, iv. 226, 227 Oviparous animals,
distinguished from the viviparous, the two classes for generation; all other
modes held imaginary and erroneous, ii. 22 Ouran-outang, the wild man of the
wood, an animal nearly approaching the human race, is the foremost of the
ape-kind -- this name given to various animals walking upright; but of
different countries proportions and powers -- the troglodyte of Bontius, the
drill of Purchase, and the pygmy of Tyson have received this general name, iv.
189 -- its description in a comparative view with man, iv. 191 -- gigantic
races of it described by travelers truly formidable -- many are taller than
man, active, strong, intrepid, cunning, lascivious, and cruel -- countries
where found -- in Borneo the quality course him as we do the stag, and this
hunting is a favorite amusement of the king -- runs with great celerity -- its
description, iv. 200 to 202 -- Battle calls him pongo; assures us that in all
he resembles man, but is larger to a gigantic state -- a native of the tropical
climates -- he lives upon fruits, and is not carnivorous -- goes in companies;
and this troop meeting one of the human species without succor, show him no
mercy -- they jointly attack the elephant, beat him with clubs, and force him
to leave that part of the forest they claim as their own, iv. 201 -- is so
strong, that ten men are not a match for it -- none of the kind taken but very
young -- one of them dying, the rest cover the body with leaves and branches --
a negro boy taken by one of these, and carried into the woods, continued there
a whole year without any injury -- they often attempt the female negroes going
into the woods, and keep them against their wills for their company, feeding
them plentifully all the time -- a traveller assures, that he knew a woman of
Loango that lived among them for three years -- they build sheds, and use clubs
for their defense, iv. 202 -- sometimes walk upright, and sometimes upon all
fours, when phantastically disposed, iv. 203 -- though it resembles man in form,
and imitates his actions, it is inferior in sagacity even to the elephant or
the beaver, iv. 204 -- two of these creatures brought to Europe discovered an
astonishing power of imitation, sat at table like men, ate of every thing
without distinction, made use of knife, fork, and spoon, drank wine and other
liquors -- the male of these two creatures being sea-sick, was twice bled in
the arm; and afterward, when out of order, he showed his arm as desirous of
relief by bleeding, iv. 197 -- another was surprisingly well behaved, drank
wine moderately, and gladly left it for milk or other sweet liquors -- it had a
defluxion upon the breast which increasing caused its death in the space of one
year from its arrival, iv. 196 Ounce, or onza, iii. 254 -- distinguished from
the panther, the ounce of Linnaeus, iii. 255 -- remarkable for being easily
tamed, and employed all over the East for the purposes of hunting, iii. 85, 86,
and 260 -- does not pursue by the smell like the dog-kind, iii. 261 -- the
hyena attacks it, and seldom fails to conquer, iii. 343 -- one at present in
the Tower of London, with which the keeper plays without the smallest
apprehension, iii, 260 -- manner of hunting with it, iii. 261 Owl, common mark
by which all birds of this kind are distinguished from others -- general
characteristics of birds of the owl-kind, v. 137 to 142 -- the skreech-owl, and
its distinctive marks, v. 86 -- though dazzled by a bright daylight, they do
not see best in darkest nights, as imagined, v. 138 -- seasons in which they
see best -- nights of moonlight the times of their successful plunder -- seeing
in the night, or being dazzled by day, not alike in every species of this kind,
v. 139 -- instances in the white, or barn-owl, and in the brown-horn owl --
description of the great horned owl, v. 14O -- description of the common horned
owl, v. 85, 86, 141 -- names of several owls without horns, v. 141 -- these
horns nothing more than two or three feathers that stand up on each side of the
head over the ear, v. 140 -- times of making their excursions -- places where
found in the daytime, v. 142, 143 -- father Kircher having set the voices of
birds to music, has given all the tones of the owl note, which make a most
tremendous melody, v. 143 -- sometimes bewildered -- what they do in that
distress, v. 144 -- aversion of small birds to the owl -- how they injure and
torment him in the daytime -- an owl appearing by day sets a whole grove into
an uproar, v. 143 -- small birds sometimes hunt the owl until evening, when
recovering sight, he makes the foremost pay dear for their sport, and does not
always leave man an unconcerned spectator -- sport of bird-catchers, by
counterfeiting the cry of the owl -- in what manner the great horned owl is
used by falconers to lure the kite, when wanted for training the falcon, v. 144
-- places where the great horned owl breeds -- its nest, and number of eggs --
the lesser owl takes by (...) the nest of some other bird -- number of eggs --
the other owls build near the place where they chiefly prey, v. 145 -- a single
owl more serviceable than six cats, in ridding a barn of mice, iv. 146 -- an
army of mice devoured at Hallontide by a number of strange ^nted owls -- are
shy of man, extremely untractable, and difficult to tame -- the white owl in
captivity refuses all nourishment, and dies of hunger -- account of Mr. Buffon
to this purpose, v. 146 Ox, its eyes are brown, ii. 83 -- on the fertile plains
of India it grows to a size four times as large as the same kind bred in the
Alps, ii. 237 -- one in England sixteen hands high; its growth depends on the
richness of pasture, iii. 13 Oxney, an island near Romney marsh, in what manner
produced, i. 275 Oysters, bivalved shellfish, are self-impregnated, vii. 48 --
the particulars in which they differ from the muscle -- growing even amidst
branches of the forest, vii. 48, 49 -- have no other seeming food than the
afflux of seawater -- they are deposited in beds where the tide comes in, at
Colchester, and other places of the kingdom -- these said to be better tasted,
vii. 50 -- amazing size of oysters along the coast of Coromandel, vii. 51 --
surprising manner in which monkies manage an oyster, iv. 227 -- a horse known
to be fond of oysters, ii. 327 -- the pearl oyster has a large whitish shell,
the internal coat of which is the mother of pearl, vii. 55
P.
Paca, improperly called American rabbit, an animal of South America -- its
cry, and manner of eating, iv. 52 -- is most like the agouti, yet differs in
several particulars -- its description -- places where generally found, iv. 53
-- its flesh considered a delicacy, and eaten skin and all, like a young pig --
is seldom taken alive, defending itself to the last extremity -- persecuted not
only by man, but by every beast and bird of prey -- breeds in such numbers, the
diminution is not perceptible, iv. 54 Pachomac deserts, where the formidable
bird condor is chiefly seen, men seldom venture to travel, hissing serpents,
and prowling panthers, being the scattered inhabitants, v. 105, 106
Pacific-sea, the winds never change in it, i. 340 Pacos, a kind of camel in
South America -- its wool very valuable, iv. 317 Paddock-moon, the silence of
frogs in dry weather, may serve to explain an opinion, that there is a month in
the year so called, in which they never croak, vii. 88 Pain, nothing but
repeated experience shows how seldom pain can be suffered to the utmost, ii.
208 Painters never fully imitate that bold relievo, which both eyes give to the
object, ii. 150 Paleness often the effect of anger, and almost ever the
attendant of fright and fear, ii. 93 Palm Tree, the elephant eats the shoots,
leaves, and branches, to the stump, iv. 259 -- its juice drank by the rousette,
or the great bat of Madagascar, iv. 142 Pambamarca, mountain at Quito in Peru
-- a very uncommon meteor seen upon it by Ulloa, i. 383 Pangolin, vulgarly the
scaly lizard, is a native of the torrid climates of the ancient continent -- of
all animals, the best protected from external injury, its description, iv. 119
-- at the approach of an enemy, it rolls itself up like the hedgehog, iv. 120
-- the tiger, panther, and hyena, make vain attempts to force this animal, when
it rolls itself up like the hedgehog -- its flesh is considered by the negroes
of Africa as a great delicacy, iv. 121 -- it has no teeth -- lives entirely
upon insects -- there is not a more harmless inoffensive creature than this,
unmolested -- cunning in hunting for its prey -- chiefly keeps in the obscure
parts of forests, iv. 123 -- its tongue, when extended, is shot out to above a
quarter of a yard beyond the tip of the nose, iv. 122 -- countries where found,
iv, 124 Panther, the foremost of the mischievous spotted kind, by many
naturalists mistaken for the tiger, iii. 250 -- the panther of Senegal -- the
large panther -- difference between these two, iii. 251 -- that of America, or
jaguar, compared with two former, iii. 252, 253 -- sometimes employed in
hunting -- the gazelle, or leveret, are it is prey -- it sometimes to attack its
employer, iii. 260 -- it naturally hunts the sheep and the goat, ii. 320 --
attends to the call of the jackall, iii. 337 Par, a peasant, lived to a hundred
and forty-four, without being abstemious, ii. 201 Paradise-bird, few have more
deceived and puzzled the learned than this -- it is an inhabitant of the
Molucca islands -- erroneous reports concerning this bird, and what has given
rise to them -- the native savages of those islands carefully cut off its legs
before they bring it to market; and why, v. 257 -- two kinds of the bird of
Paradise, v. 258 -- their distinction from other birds -- the description of
this bird, v. 259 -- found in great numbers in the island of Aro, where the
inhabitants call it God's bird -- live in large flocks, and at night perch upon
the same tree -- are called by some, the swallows of Ternate, and, like them,
have their stated times of return, v. 260 -- their king distinguished from the
rest by the luster of his plumage, and the respect and veneration paid to him
-- killing the king, the best chance of getting the flock -- the chief mark to
know the king is by the ends of the feathers in the tail, having eyes like
those of the peacock, v. 261 -- a number of these birds taken, the method is to
gut them, cut off their legs, dry the internal moisture with a hot iron, and
fill the cavity with salt and spices, then sell them to the Europeans for a
mere trifle, v. 262 -- how this bird breeds, or what the number of its young,
remains for discovery, v. 261 -- for beauty it exceeds all others of the
pie-kind, v. 260 Parakeets, a kind of parrot of a lesser size, v. 273 -- of
that kind in Brasil, Labat assures us, there are the most beautiful in plumage,
and the most talkative birds in nature, v. 281. See Parrot. Parana, a river in
South America, wherewith at eight hundred leagues from its source, the Plata
runs to its mouth, i. 216 Parasina, name given by the Italians to a fishing
line, not less than twenty miles long -- baited with ten or twelve thousand
hooks, and sunk to the bottom along the coast in the Mediterranean for that
fishing called the pielago, vi. 258 Parasite plants, not able to support
themselves, grow and fix upon some neighboring tree, ii. 10 Pard, name given
by Linnaeus to the panther, iii. 250 Pardalis, another name Gesner gives the
panther, iii. 250 Parrot, the middle or second size of the kind, described, v.
272 to 274 -- the ease with which this bird is taught to speak, and the number
of words it is capable of repeating, are surprising -- a grave writer affirms,
that one of these was taught to repeat a whole sonnet from Petrarch -- the
author has seen one taught to pronounce the ninth commandment articulately, v.
270 -- account of a parrot belonging to king Henry VII. which fell into the
Thames, crying, A boat, twenty pound for a boat, v. 271 -- Linnaeus makes its
varieties amount to forty-seven; Brisson extends his catalogue to ninety-five,
and the author thinks them numberless -- assertion, that the natives of Brasil
by art change the color of a parrot's plumage, v. 272 -- peculiarities
observed in their conformation, v. 273 -- common enough in Europe, will not,
however, breed here -- loses spirits and appetite during the rigor of winter
-- instances of sagacity and docility, particularly of the great parrot called
aicurous, v. 275 to 277 -- their habits -- their nests, and the number of eggs,
v. 278 -- usual method of taking the young -- always speak best, when not
accustomed to harsh wild notes, v. 279 -- what fruit or grain these birds feed
upon, their flesh partakes of the flavor and taste -- instances of it -- seed
of the cotton-tree intoxicates them, as wine does man -- wine renders them more
talkative and amusing, v. 280 -- in France very expert, but nothing to those of
Brasil, which Clusius says, are most sensible and cunning, v. 276 -- natives of
Brasil shoot them with heavy arrows, headed with cotton, which knock down the
bird without killing it -- those of the parakeet tribe are delicate eating, v.
280 -- of this kind in Brasil, Labat assures there are the most beautiful in
plumage, and the most talkative possible -- are restless and ever on the wing
-- their habits, v. 281 -- their outcry when their companions fall -- are very
destructive on the coast of Guinea -- more than a hundred different kinds
counted on the coast of Africa, v. 282 -- the white sort called lories, v. 272
-- countries where found -- one, north of the Cape of Good Hope, takes its name
from the multitude of parrots in its woods -- an hundred kinds now known, not
one of which naturally breeds in countries that acknowledged the Roman power --
the green parakeet, with a red neck, was the first of the kind brought into
Europe, and the only one known to the ancients from Alexander the Great to
Nero, v. 283 -- disorders peculiar to the parrot-kind -- one well kept will
live five or six and twenty years, v. 284 Parsley, pinks, and birch, hares are
particularly fond of, iv. 7 Partridges, in England, a favorite delicacy at the
tables of the rich, whose desire of keeping them to themselves, has been
gratified with laws for their preservation, no way harmonizing with the general
spirit of English legislation, and why, v. 207 -- there are two kinds, the gray
and the red; the gray is most prolific, and always keep on the ground -- the
red less common, and perches upon trees -- the partridge is found in every
country, and climate -- in Greenland, where it is brown in summer, becomes
white in winter, v. 208, 209 -- those of Barakonda are larger legged, swifter
of foot, and reside in the highest rocks -- partridges of all sorts agree in
one character, being immoderately addicted to venery; often to an unnatural
degree -- the male pursues the hen to her nest, and breaks her eggs, rather
than be disappointed -- the young having kept in flocks during the winter,
break society in spring, when they begin to pair; and terrible combats ensue --
their manners otherwise resemble those of poultry, but their cunning and
instincts are superior, v. 209 -- means the female uses to draw away any
formidable animal that approaches her nest -- the covies are from ten to
fifteen, and, unmolested, they live from fifteen to seventeen years -- method
of taking them in a net with a setting-dog, the most pleasant, and most secure,
v. 210 -- they are never so tame as our domestic poultry, v. 211 Passage (birds
of) causes of their emigrations, v. 32 -- in one country are not so in others
-- many of those kinds which at certain seasons leave England, are seen in
other climates, never to depart, it is also frequent, that some birds with us
faithful residents, in other kingdoms put on the nature of birds of passage --
instances of both, v. 318, 319 Passions, most of the furious sort characterized
from the elevation and depression of the eyebrows, ii. 84 -- freedom from
passions not only adds to the happiness of the mind, but preserves the beauty
of the face, ii. 198 Pastures, those of Great Britain excellently adapted to
quadrupeds of the cow-kind, iii. 9 Patas, by some called the red African monkey
-- its description, iv. 233 St. Paul, in Lower Brittany, in that neighborhood
lies a tract of land along the seaside, which before the year 1666 was
inhabited, but is now a desert covered with sand, to the height of twenty feet,
i. 364 Paunch, name of the first stomach of ruminating animals, iii. 3 Pazan,
name of the eighth variety of gazelles, by Mr. Buffon, iii. 74 Peacock,
varieties of this bird -- some white, others crested -- that of Thibet, the
most beautiful of the feathered creation, v. 176 -- a saying among the
ancients, as beautiful as is the peacock among birds, so is the tiger among
quadrupeds, iii. 233 -- our first were brought from the East Indies; and they
are still found in flocks in a wild state in the islands of Java and Ceylon --
the common people of Italy say it has the plumage of an angel, the voice of a
devil, and the guts of a thief -- in the days of Solomon we find his navies
imported from the East apes and peacocks, v. 171 -- Aelian relates they were
brought into Greece from some barbarous country, and that a male and female
were valued at thirty pounds of our money -- it is said also, that when
Alexander was in India, he saw them flying wild, on the banks of the river
Hyarotis, and was so struck with their beauty, that he laid a fine and
punishment on all who should kill or disturb them -- the Greeks were so much
taken with the beauty of this bird, when first brought among them, that it was
shown for money; and many came to Athens from Lacedaemon and Thessaly to see
it, v. 172 -- once esteemed a delicacy at the tables of the rich and great, v.
171 -- Ausidius Hurco stands charged by Pliny with being the first who fatted
up the peacock for the feasts of the luxurious, v. 172 -- Hortensius the orator
was the first who served them up at an entertainment at Rome -- and they are
talked of as the first of viands -- in the times of Francis I. it was a custom
to serve up peacocks to the tables of the great, not to be eaten, but seen; in
what manner they served them -- its flesh is said to keep longer unputrefied
than any other, v. 173 -- has a predilection for barley -- but as a proud and
fickle bird, there is scarce any food it will at all times like -- it strips
the tops of houses of tiles or thatch, lays waste the labors of the gardener,
roots up the choicest seeds, and nips favorite flowers in the bud -- is still
more salacious than the cock, v. 174 -- requires five females at least to
attend him; and the number not sufficient, will run upon and tread the sitting
hen -- the pea-hen, as much as possible hides her nest from him, that he may
not disturb her sitting -- she seldom lays above five or six eggs in this
climate -- Aristotle describes her laying twelve -- in forests where they breed
naturally, they are very numerous -- this bird lives about twenty years -- and
not till the third year has that beautiful variegated plumage of its tail -- in
the kingdom of Cambaya, says Taverner, near the city of Baroch, whole flocks of
them are in the fields -- description of their habits -- decoy made use of to
catch them there, v. 175 Sea-peacock, a name given, and by which has been
described the Balearic crane, from some resemblance in disposition and manners,
v. 388 Peak of Teneriff, its volcano seldom free from eruptions, i. 99 Peak, a
noted mountain in the Molucca islands, seen far off at sea, swallowed by an
earthquake, and a lake left where it stood, i. 162 Pearl, an animal substance
concreted and taking a tincture from the air, vii. 57 -- found in all bivalved
shells, the inside of which resemble that substance called mother of pearl,
vii. 53 -- the formation of pearls a disease or an accident in the animal is
not known -- common opinion upon this subject, vii. 54 -- the pearl bred from
no disorder in the animal -- pearl-oyster, from which the mother-of-pearl is
taken, vii. 55 -- several pearl fisheries -- the chief of them in the Persian
Gulf, and the most valuable pearls brought from thencesdifferent sizes,
figures, and colors, vii. 56 -- whence their different colors proceed --
pearls converted by time and damps into a chalky powder, vii. 57 -- wretched
people destined to fish for pearls -- usually die consumptive, vii. 58 -- in
what manner they fish for them, vii. 59 Pearls in stags, are parts rising from
the crust of the beam, iii. 114 Peasants, the meanest of them in Germany,
Poland, and Switzerland kills a cow for his own table, salts and hangs up, and
preserves it as a delicacy all the year round, iii. 9 Peccary, or tajacu, an
animal a native of America, at first view resembling a small hog -- its
description -- has upon the back a lump like the navel in other animals, iii.
183 -- it consists of glands producing a liquor of an offensive smell, iii. 184
-- when killed the parts of generation and the glands on the back must be taken
instantly away, otherwise in half an hour the flesh becomes unfit to be eaten,
iii. 186 -- though like the hog in many respects, is nevertheless a distinct
race, and will not mix nor produce an intermediate race -- is easily tamed,
iii. 188 -- goes in herds of two or three hundred, and unites, like hogs, in
each other's defense, iii. 186 -- delights not in marshes or mud like our hogs
-- an unceasing enemy to the lizard, the toad, and the serpent kinds -- also
feeds upon toads and serpents, iii. 187 -- any plunderer seizing their young is
surrounded and often killed, iii. 186 Pedigree, the Arabians preserve that of
their best horses with great care, and for several generations back, ii. 350
Pegu, a river called the Indian Nile, because of the similar overflowings of
its stream, i. 218 Pelagii, the Latin name for those shells fished up from the
deep -- those cast on the shore are the littorales, vii. 13 Pelican, a
ruminating bird, iii. 5 -- a native of Africa and America; once known in
Europe, particularly in Russia -- fabulous accounts propagated of it -- the
description of it, particularly of its bill, and the great pouch underneath, as
wonderful -- Tertre affirms the pouch will hide fish enough to serve sixty
hungry men for a meal -- this pouch placed at the top of the gullet, considered
as the crop in other birds, vi. 51 to 53 -- the description of the bird from
father Labat, vi. 54 -- indolent habits in preparing for incubation, and
defending their young, vi. 56 -- their gluttony scarcely to be satisfied; their
flesh rancid, and tastes worse than it smells -- use made by the Americans of
their pouches, vi. 57 -- is not entirely incapable of instruction in a domestic
state -- instances of it, vi. 58 -- Aldrovandus mentions one believed to be
fifty years old, vi. 59 Penguin, a heavy water fowl; the wings of this tribe
unfit for flight, vi. 90 -- and their legs still more aukwardly adapted for
walking, vi. 91 -- our sailors call them arse-feet -- they dive to the bottom,
or swim between two waters -- they never visit land but when coming to breed,
vi. 92 -- their color -- are covered more warmly with feathers than other
birds -- description of the Magellanic penguin, vi. 93 -- they unite in them
the qualities of men, fowls, and fishes -- instances of its gluttonous appetite
-- their food and flesh -- are a bird of society, vi. 94 -- season of laying,
and manner of making their nests, vi. 95 -- some of this tribe called by our
seamen the booby -- our men first coming among them, were not distrusted nor
avoided, they stood to be shot at in flocks, till every one was destroyed --
the females let them take their eggs without any resistance, vi. 96 -- the
penguin lays but one egg; in frequented shores -- burrows like a rabbit --
three or four take possession of one hole, and hatch -- one is placed as a
sentinel to warn of approaching danger, vi. 97 -- union between this bird and
the albatross, and regularity in their building together, vi. 63 Peninsula of
India, on one side the coasts are near half the year harrassed by violent
hurricanes and northern tempests, i. 348 -- the people there employ the
elephant chiefly in carrying or drawing burdens, iv. 278 Penpark-hole, in
Gloucestershire, twenty-five fathom perpendicular depth -- its description,
from captain Sturmey, i. 66 People, so young as fourteen or fifteen often found
to cease growing, ii. 19 Pepper, the Indians prefer that devoured and voided
unconcocted by the toucan, before the pepper fresh gathered from the tree, v.
244 Perch, a prickly-finned thoracic fish -- its description, vi. 308 Perfumes,
some physicians think all perfumes unwholesome -- our delight in perfumes seems
made by habit, ii. 181 -- many bodies at a distance give an agreeable perfume,
and nearer have a most ungrateful odor, ii. 182 -- no perfume has a stronger
or more permanent smell than musk, iii. 89 -- the scent of the martin a most
pleasing perfume, iii. 367 -- some of the weasel kind have a smell approaching
to perfume, iii. 380 -- that of the musk or the civet, iii. 382 -- in what
manner taken from the pouch, iii. 391 -- more grateful perfume than musk, iii.
393 -- that of Amsterdam the purest of any, -- is communicated to all parts of
the animals body; the fur impregnated, and the skin also -- a person shut up
with one of the skins in a close room cannot support the scent, iii. 192 --
this perfume sold in Holland for about fifteen shillings an ounce, iii. 393 --
it has no analogy with the creature's appetite for generation, iii. 395 -- a
proof of it -- has its vicissitudes of fashion, like dress, iii. 394
Persepolis, pastures in the plains about that place excellent for the purposes
of rearing horses, ii. 361 Persia snow falls in abundance upon its mountains,
i. 358 -- the horses of that country the most beautiful and most valuable of
all in the East, ii. 361 -- there are studs of ten thousand white mares
together, with the hoof so hard that shoeing is unnecessary, ii. 355 --
description of the Persian horses by Pietro della Valle, ii. 361 -- the flesh
of the wild ass so much liked that its delicacy is a proverb there, ii. 378 --
an entertainment of wild asses exhibited by the monarch to Olearius, ii. 377,
378 -- two kinds of asses there, and some of them worth forty or fifty pounds,
ii. 385, 386 -- a noted country for giving long soft hair to the animals bred
in it, iii. 212 -- lions found to diminish in number in this country, iii. 215
-- the bird of Persia is the common cock of Aristophanes, v. 161 Persian Gulf,
a very dangerous wind prevails, by the natives called the sameyel -- it
suddenly kills those it involves in its passage, and frequently assumes a
visible form, darting in a blueish vapor along the surface of the country, i.
358 -- the poets of Persia and Arabia have described it as under the conduct of
vengeance, who governs its terrors, and raises or depresses it, as he thinks
proper, i. 359 -- the chief pearl fishery carried on there, vii. 56 -- that
gulf choked up in many places with coraline substances, viii. 192 Persian
kings, wore their whiskers matted with gold thread, ii. 97 Persians admire
large eyebrows, joining in the middle, ii. 76 -- divided into two classes,
tyrants and slaves, vii. 58 Perspiration, an experiment from which the learned
may infer upon what foundation the doctrine of Sanctorian perspiration is
built, ii. 110, 111 Peruvians, father Acosta, and Garcilasso de la Vega, make
no doubt but that they understood the art of preserving their dead for a long
space of time, ii. 273 Peter the Great, czar of Russia, celebrated a marriage
of dwarfs, ii. 251 -- the preparations for this wedding were grand, yet
executed in a style of barbarous ridicule, ii. 252 Petreoleum, an injection of
this bituminous oil inwardly, and an application of asphaltum without, suffice
to make a mummy, ii. 287 Pettichaps, a bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 314
Phalanger, a kind of oppossum -- its description -- has been called the rat of
Surinam, iv. 248 Pharaoh, (the cat of) name given to the ichneumon, iii. 376
Pharaoh, (the capon of) thought to be the true ibis -- a devourer of serpents,
and will follow the caravans to Mecca, to feed upon the offal of animals killed
on the journey, v. 385 Phasis, a river of Colchis, in Asia Minor, from the
banks of which the pheasants were brought into Europe, and still retain their
name, v. 184 Phatagin, an animal less than the pangolin -- the extent of its
tail above twice the length of its body -- countries where it is to be found,
iv. 124 Pheasants, at first propagated among us, brought into Europe from the
banks of the Phasis, a river of Colchis, in Asia Minor, whence they still
retain their name -- Croesus, king of Lydia, seated on his throne, adorned with
the barbarous pomp of eastern splendor, asked Solon whether he ever beheld any
thing so fine? Solon replied, that having seen the beautiful plumage of the
pheasant, no other finery could astonish him, v. 184 -- description of this
beautiful bird, v. 185 -- its flesh the greatest dainty -- animals of the
domestic kind, once reclaimed, still continue domestic, and persevere in the
habits and appetites of willing slavery; but the pheasant, taken from its
native warm retreats, still continues his attachment to native freedom; and
wild among us, is an envied ornament of our parks and forests, where he feeds
upon acorns and berries, v. 186 -- in the woods the hen pheasant lays from
eighteen to twenty eggs in a season; but in a domestic state seldom above ten
-- when wild, she hatches and leads up her brood with patience, vigilance, and
courage; but when tame she never sits well; and a common hen becomes her
substitute; and for leading her young to their food, she is utterly ignorant
where it is found -- and the young would starve if left solely to her
management -- it is better left at large in the woods than reduced to its
pristine captivity -- its fecundity, when wild, is sufficient to stock the
forest, and its flesh acquires a higher flavor from its unlimited freedom --
its habits, when tame, v. 187 -- no birds are shot more easily, v. 188 -- when
physicians of old spoke of wholesomness of viands, the comparison lay with the
flesh of the pheasant, v. 186 -- these birds taken young into keeping, become
as familiar as chickens; and when designed for breeding, they are put together
in a yard, five hens to a cock -- the nest in their natural state -- the female
refusing to hatch the eggs, a common hen supplies her place, and performs the
task with perseverance and success -- the young difficult to be reared, v. 188
-- with what food the young must be supplied -- particularities concerning the
rearing of the young ones -- the method of Longolius, to increase the breed and
make it more valuable -- the pheasant will at last be brought to couple with a
common hen, v. 189 -- many varieties of pheasants; of all others, the golden
pheasant of China the most beautiful, v. 190 Phlegium, one of the highest
mountains of Ethiopia, swallowed by an earthquake, i. 162 Pholas, the
file-fish, places where these animals are found, vii. 65, 69 -- their power of
penetrating -- the pillars of the temple of Serapis at Puteoli were penetrated
by them -- they pierce the hardest bodies with their tongue, vii. 67 -- their
motion slow beyond conception -- have no other food but the seawater, vii. 68
-- are accounted a great deliaccy, vii. 69 Pichincha, a remarkable mountain,
near Quito, in South America, i. 151 Pie, in the class of the pie-kind, few,
except the pigeon, are of use to man; yet, to each other, no class of birds so
ingenious, active, and well-fitted for society, v. 220 -- they live in pairs,
and their attachments are confined to each other -- they build nests in trees
or bushes; the male shares in the labor of building, and relieves his mate in
the duties of incubation; and the young once excluded, both are equally active
in making them ample provision -- general laws prevail, and a republican form
of government is established among them -- they watch for the general safety of
every bird of the grove, v. 221 -- they are remarkable for instinct and
capacity for instruction -- instances of it -- fetching and carrying untaught,
all this tribe are but too fond of -- their passion for shining things and such
toys as some of us put a value upon -- rings found in the nest of a tame
magpie, v. 222 -- the few general characters in which they all agree, v. 223
Sea-pie breeds in this country, and resides in its marshy parts, vi. 29 Pigeons
are ruminating birds, iii. 5 -- those that live in a wild state by no means so
fruitful as those in our pigeon-houses nearer home -- the tame pigeon, and all
its beautiful varieties, owe their origin to one species, the stock-dove --
colors of the pigeon in a state of nature, v. 285, 286 -- the dove-house
pigeon breeds every month, v. 286 -- the hatching of its eggs, v. 287 -- a full
explanation of the method of feeding their young from the crop, v. 288, 289 --
pigeons bred to a feather means a display of art by those persons who employ
themselves in rearing pigeons of different colors, ii. 248 -- various names of
tame pigeons -- attempts made to render domestic the ring-dove, but hitherto
fruitless, v. 293 -- the turtle-dove a bird of passage -- a pair put in a cage,
and one dying, the other does not survive, v. 294 -- the pigeon called
ocotzimtzcan is one of the splendid tenants of the Mexican forests, v. 295 --
pigeons of the dove-house not so faithful as the turtle-dove -- two males
quarrel for the same mistress; and when the female admits the addresses of a
new gallant, her old companion bears the contempt with marks of displeasure,
abstains from her company, or when he approaches is sure to chastise her --
instances of two males displeased with their mates, who have made an exchange,
and lived in harmony with their new companions, v. 290, 291 -- near fifteen
thousand pigeons may in four years be produced from a single pair -- the
stock-dove seldom breeds above twice a year -- have a stronger attachment to
their young than those who breed so often -- the pigeons called carriers used
to convey letters, nor trained with as much care as formerly, when sent from a
besieged city to those coming to relieve it -- in an hour and a half, they
perform a journey of forty miles -- the only use now made of them is to be let
off at Tyburn, when the cart is drawn away, v. 292 Pigmy, existence of a pigmy
race of mankind founded in error or in fable, ii. 251 Pigtail is the last of
the baboons -- Mr. Buffon calls it maimon -- its description -- is a native of
Sumatra, not well enduring the rigours of our climate, iv. 215 Pike, the
description of this fish, vi. 313 -- poets have called it the tyrant of the
watery plain -- instances of their rapacity, vi. 345 Pilchards, little
differing from the herring -- make the coast of Cornwall their place of resort
-- the natives sometimes enclose a bay of several miles extent with nets called
saines -- how directed, some years ago, to know where to extend the nets, vi.
331, 332 -- they take twelve or fifteen hundred barrels of pilchards at a
draught -- serve also for manure -- advantages of this fishery, vi. 333 --
money paid for pilchards exported has annually amounted to near fifty thousand
pounds, vi. 334 Pillau, on the Baltic, the shores near that place divided into
districts for the sturgeon-fishery, and alloted to companies of fishermen, who
rent some of them at three hundred pounds a year, vi 279 Pills, of calcined
shells and tobacco, used by the American Indians undertaking long journies, to
palliate hunger, ii. 133 Pilori, one of the three distinctions of the musk-rat
-- it is a native of the West India islands iv. 78 Pilot of the shark, name
given the sucking-fish or remora, and why, vi. 246 Pinch, name of a monkey of
the sagoin-kind -- its description, iv. ^37 Pinks, hares are as particularly
fond of them as of parsley and birch, iv. 7 Pintada, or the guinea hen, its
description -- different names given to this bird -- its habits -- the eggs are
speckled, v. 192 Pintail, a kind of duck has the two middle feathers of the
tail three inches longer than the rest, vi. 130 Pipal, the Surinam toad, an
extraordinary and hideous creature -- its description -- the young bred and
hatched on its back, vii. 108 Pipe of the shepherd, the stag seems delighted
with its sound, iii. 105 Pipe-fish, cartilaginous and not thicker than a
swan-quill -- its description, vi. 289 Pipes, conducting water, upon what
principle they depend, i. 185 -- why those in London are extremely apt to
burst, i. 186 Piper-worms, and other little animals, fix their habitations to
the oyster's sides, and live in security, vii. 48 Pit-falls, a wolf, a friar,
and a woman taken in one all in the same night -- the woman lost her senses,
the friar his reputation, and the wolf his life, iii. 31^ Pithekos, name given
by the ancients to the ape properly so called, iv. 206 Pivot, the razor-shell,
its motion and habits, vii. 252, is allured by salt, vii. 53 Placenta, the
burden, or that body by which the animal is supplied with nourishment, ii. 40,
41 Plague, not well known whence it has its beginning -- is propagated by
infection, i. 327 -- some countries, even in the midst of Africa, never
infected with it -- others generally visited by it once a year, as Egypt -- not
known in Nigritia -- Numidia it molests not once in a hundred years, i. 328 --
plague spread over the world in 1346, after two years traveling from the great
kingdom of Cathay, north of China, to Europe -- the plague desolated the city
of London in 1665, i. 329 -- its contagious steams produced spots on the walls
-- for this last age, it has abated its violence, even in those countries where
most common, and why, i. 330 -- a plague affected trees and stones, i. 329
Plaisne en Anjou, a village in France, particular account of a dwarf born
there, ii. 255 Plaster of Paris finely powdered boils and heaves in great
waves, like water, i. 181 Plantane, preferred by the ass to every other
vegetable, ii. 381 Planets exceed the earth one thousand times in magnitude --
at first supposed to wander in the heavens without fixed paths -- perform their
circuits with great exactness and strict regularity, i. 3 -- the lesser planets
attendants upon some of the greater, i. 5 Plants and vegetables compared with
animals, similitude -- how assimilated in different climates and soils, ii. 3
to 8 -- will not grow so fast in distilled as undistilled water, i. 167 -- do
not vegetate in an exhausted receiver, i. 315 -- but thus ceasing to vegetate,
keep longer sweet than when exposed to external air, i. 316 -- their juices
rarefied principally by the sun, to give an escape to their imprisoned air, i.
338 -- smell of force so powerful as hardly to be endured, i. 219 -- a certain
plant in Ireland so strongly affected the person who beat it in a mortar, and
the physician present, that their hands and faces swelled to an enormous size,
and continued tumid for some time after, i. 326 -- the sensitive, that moves at
the touch, has as much perception as the fresh water polypus, possessed of a
still slower share of motion, ii. 3 -- the parasite fix and depend upon
neighboring trees for that support their rampant dispositions prompts them to
seek, ii. 10 -- the most pernicious of that race, is the caraguata, in the West
Indies; it loads its supporter with a verdure not its own, takes away its
nourishment, and entirely destroys it, ii 4 -- many plants propagated from the
depositions of birds, v. 316 -- plan^s, submarine, corals and other vegetables,
covering the bottom of the sea, i. 288 Plate, or Plata, a great river in South
America -- its source and length, i. 216 -- receives above fifty rivers, i. 218
Platina, or white gold, the most obstinate of all substances, i. 74
Plemonecles, the flumide, description of this fish, vi. 312 Pleurs en
Champagne, a town in France, buried beneath a rocky mountain, i. 158 Pliny, in
his arrangements different from the present, placed the bats among birds, iv.
134 Plover, the green and gray, are birds of passage, vi. 28 -- the Norfolk
plover, vi. 29 -- season of courtship, vi. 31 Plumage of the king-fisher
preserves its luster longer than any other, vi. 148 Pochard, a kind of duck,
vi. 130 Poetry, our ancestors excel us in the poetic arts, as they had the
first rifling of all the striking images of nature, ii. 266 Point, the central
point of a whirlpool is always lowest, and why, i. 205 Pointer, a kind of dog,
iii. 286 Poison, the most deadly poisons are often of great use in medicine,
ii. 13 -- Pliny, Aelian, and Oppian, have supplied the weapon of the fireflare
with a poison that affects even the inanimate creation, vi. 259 -- but we have
every reason to doubt of it, vi. 260 -- fishes often live and subsist upon such
substances as are poisonous to the more perfect classes of animated nature --
that numbers of fishes inflict poisonous wounds, in the opinion of many, cannot
be doubted, vi. 348 -- the greatest part of the fish, on the coast of New
Providence, one of the Bahama islands, are all of a poisonous nature -- the
many speculations and conjectures to which this poisonous quality in some
fishes has given rises, vi. 349, 350 -- some crabs found poisonous, vi. 376 --
the seat where the poison in venomous serpents lies, i. 194 -- the
serpent-poison may be taken inwardly, without any sensible effects, or any
prejudice to the constitution, vii. 198 -- an instance of it -- if milk be
injected into a vein, it will kill with more certain destruction than even the
poison of the viper, vii. 199, 200 Poland, the peasant there kills a cow in
autumn for his own table; he salts and hangs it up, and thus preserves it as a
delicacy all the year round, iii. 9 Polar regions, description of them, i. 11,
12 -- and of the inhabitants round them, ii. 213 Pole-cat, a distinct species
from the ermine, iii. 358 -- resembles the ferret so much, that some have
thought them the same animal -- there are many distinctions between them --
warreners assert the pole-cat will mix with the ferret, iii. 363 -- Mr. Buffon
denies it -- description of the pole-cat -- very destructive to young game,
iii. 364 -- seizes the flying-squirrel, iv. 36 -- the rabbit its favorite
prey; and one pole-cat destroys a whole warren by a wound hardly perceptible --
generally reside in woods or thick brakes, making holes two yards deep under
ground -- in winter, they rob the hen-roost and the dairy -- particularly
destructive among pigeons, iii. 365 -- and feast upon their brains, iii. 366 --
fond also of honey, iii. 358 and 366 -- female brings forth in summer five or
six young at a time, and supplies the want of milk with the blood of such
animals as she can seize -- the fur is in less estimation than of inferior
kinds, and why -- an inhabitant of temperate climates, being afraid of cold as
well as heat, iii. 366, 367 -- the species confined in Europe to a range from
Poland to Italy, iii. 367 -- pole-cat of America and Virginia are names for the
squash and the skink -- distinctions of those animals, iii. 380, 381 Poles,
trade-winds continually blow from them toward the equator, i. 343, 344 -- the
winter beginning round the poles, the same misty appearance produced in the
southern climates by heat is there produced by cold -- the sea smokes like an
oven there, i. 386 -- limbs of the inhabitants of those regions, sometimes
frozen and drop off, i. 387 -- as we approach the north pole, the size of the
natives proportionably diminishes, growing less and less as we advance higher,
ii. 217 -- the strength of the natives round the polar regions is not less
amazing than their patience in hunger, ii. 218 Polynemus, description of this
fish, vi. 310 Polypus very voracious -- its description -- uses its arms as a
fisherman his net, ii. 23 -- is not of the vegetable tribe, but a real animal
-- examined with a microscope, several little specks are seen like buds, that
pullulate from different parts of the body, and these soon appear to be young
polypi, beginning to cast their little arms about for prey; the same food is
digested, and serves for nourishment of both, ii. 24 -- every polypus has a
colony sprouting from its body; and these new ones, even while attached to the
parent, become parents themselves, with a smaller colony also budding from
themsthough cut into thousands of parts, each still retains its vivacious
quality, and shortly becomes a distinct and complete polypus, fit to reproduce
upon cutting in pieces -- it hunts for its food, and possesses a power of
choosing it or retreating from danger, ii. 25 -- dimensions of the sea-polypus,
and of that which grows in fresh waters -- the power of dissection first tried
upon these animals to multiply their numbers -- Mr. Trembley has the honor of
the first discovery of the amazing properties and powers of this little
vivacious creature, viii. 180 -- this class of animals divided into four
different kinds by Mr. Tremblay -- method of conceiving a just idea of their
figure, viii. 181 -- manner of lengthening or contracting itself, viii. 182 --
progressive moti^ appearance of an organ of sight found over the whole body --
animals of this kind inclined to turn toward the light, viii. 183 -- their way
of living, viii. 184 -- arms serve them as lime-twigs do a fowler -- how it
seizes upon its prey -- testifies its hunger by opening its mouth -- having
seized the prey, opens its mouth in proportion to the size of what it would
swallow, whether fish, flesh, or insects, viii. 185 -- when two mouths are
joined upon one common prey, the largest swallows the antagonist; but after
laying in the conqueror's body for about an hour, it issues unhurt, and often
in possession of the prey, the original cause of contention, viii. 186 -- the
cold approaching to congelation, they feel the general torpor of nature, and
their faculties are for two or three months suspended -- such as are best
supplied soonest acquire their largest size, but they diminish also in their
growth with the same facility, if their food be lessened, viii. 287 -- some
propagated from eggs; some produced by buds issuing from the body, as plants by
inoculation; while all may be multiplied by cuttings to an amazing degree of
minuteness, viii. 186, 187 -- of those produced like buds from the parent stem,
should the parent swallow a red worm, it gives a tincture to all its fluids,
and the young partakes of the parental color; but if the latter should seize
upon the same prey, the parent is no way benefited by the capture, all the
advantage thus remains with the young, viii. 189 -- several young of different
sizes are growing from its body; some just budding forth, others acquiring
perfect form, and others ready to drop from the original stem; those young,
still attached to the parent, bud and propagate also, each holding dependence
upon its parent, viii. 189, 190 -- artificial method of propagating these
animals by cuttings, viii. 190 -- Mr. Hughes describes a species of this
animal, but mistakes its nature, and calls it a sensitive flowering plant,
viii. 191 Polypus-coral, the work of an infinite number of reptiles of that
kind, viii. 194 -- in every coraline substance are a number of polypi, viii.
197 Pomerania, a large part of it covered by the sea, i. 278 Pongo, name given
by Battle to the ouran-outang, iv. 200 Poppies affect with drowsiness those who
walk through fields of them, or are occupied in preparing the flowers for
opium, i. 326 Porcelain, an artificial composition of earth and water, united
by heat, i. 166 Porcupine, as to quills, might be classed among the birds, ii.
313 -- an enlarged hedgehog -- its description, iv. 107 -- of all these
brought into Europe, not one ever seen to launch its quills, though
sufficiently provoked -- their manner of defense -- directs its quills pointing
to the enemy -- and Kolben relates, the lion then will not venture an attack --
feeds on serpents and other reptiles -- the porcupine and serpent are said
never to meet without a mortal engagement, iv. 110, 111 -- how it destroys and
devours the serpent -- porcupine of Canada subsists on vegetables -- those
brought to this country for show usually fed on bread, milk, and fruits; do not
refuse meat when offered -- is extremly hurtful to gardens -- the Americans,
who hunt it, believe it lives from twelve to fifteen years -- during the time
of coupling, in the month of September, the males become fierce and dangerous,
and often destroy each other with their teeth -- time of their gestation -- the
female brings forth one at a time; she suckles it about a month, and accustoms
it to live like herself, upon vegetables and the bark of trees, iv. 111 -- the
female very fierce in the defense of her young; at other seasons, fearful,
timid, and harmless -- the porcupine never attempts to bite or any way injure
its pursuers, manner of escaping, when hunted by a dog or a wolf -- the Indians
pursue it to make embroidery with its quills and eat its flesh -- circumstances
concerning it remaining to be known, iv. 113 -- little known with precision,
except what offers in a state of captivity -- description of one kept in an
iron cage, iv. 113 -- the porcupine of America differs much from that of the
ancient continent -- two kinds, the couando and the urson -- description of
both, iv. 114 Porcupine of the sea described, vi. 291 Pork, unpalatable with us
in summer, is the finest eating in warmer latitudes, and preferable to hog's
flesh in Europe, ii. 378, 379 Porpus, or porpess, a fish less than a grampus,
with the snout of a hog -- its description and habits, vi. 222 -- a fishery for
them along the western isles of Scotland, in the summer season, when they
abound on that shore -- live to a considerable age, though some say not above
twenty-five or thirty years -- sleep with the snout above water -- possess,
proportionably to their bulk, the manners of whales, vi. 228 -- places where
they seek for prey, vi. 226 -- destroy the nets of fishermen on the coasts of
Cornwall -- manner of killing them in the Thames, vi. 227 -- yield a large
quantity of oil -- the lean, of some not old, said to be as well tasted as veal
-- caviar prepared from the eggs of this fish, vi. 228 Portugueze pretend to
have tamed the zebra, and sent four from Africa to Lisbon, so far brought under
as to draw the king's coach, ii. 397 -- its swiftness a proverb among them, ii.
396 Ports choked up with sand by the vehemence of the wind, i. 349 Pouch, or
bag, the receptacle of the civet, differs in its opening from that of the rest
of the weasel kind -- description of it, iii. 390 -- of the bustard under the
tongue, capable of holding near seven quarts of water, v. 197 -- of the
pelican, hides as many fish as will serve sixty hungry men for a meal, vi. 53
-- its description, vi. 51, 52 Poultry, general characteristics of the
poultry-kind, v. 152 -- they live together; and each, conscious of his
strength, seldom tries a second combat, where he has been once worsted -- kept
in the same district, or fed in the same yard, they learn the arts of
subordination, v. 153 -- the young of the kind not fed with meat put into their
mouths, peck their food -- the female intent in providing food for her young
clutch, and scarce takes any nourishment at all -- among the habits of this
class of birds, is the peculiarity of dusting themselves, v. 156 -- nearly all
domestic birds of this kind maintained in our yards, are of foreign extraction,
v. 151 -- the courtship of this kind is short, and the congress fortuitous --
the male takes no heed of his offspring -- though timorous with birds of prey,
he is incredibly bold among his own kind; the sight of a male of his own
species produces a combat -- the female takes all the labor of hatching and
bringing up her young, choosing a place remote from the cock, v. 155, 156 Powis
Land, in Wales, for many ages famous for a swift and generous race of horses;
and why, ii. 370 Powters, a variety of the same pigeons, v. 293 Pregnancy of
all animals, in point of time, is proportioned to their size, ii. 336 -- the
duration in the female of the elephant, still unknown, iv. 270 -- of some women
found to continue a month beyond the usual time, ii. 47 -- in that state no
animals, except the hare, receives the male, iv. 6 Pressure, perpendicular in
rivers, always in exact proportion to the depth, i. 201 Prey, all the males of
these birds a third less, and weaker than the females, v. 84. See Birds.
Pricket, name hunters give the buck the second year, iii. 128 Primas,
appellation of a first rate animal -- Linnaeus bestows it upon the female of
the bat, iv. 138 Propagation of gnats, one of the strangest discoveries in
natural history, viii. 156 -- a new kind lately discovered in a most numerous
tribe of animals, propagated by cuttings, viii. 162 -- different manners of
that operation in the polypi, to the astonishment of the learned of Europe,
viii. 187 Propolis, a resinous gum, with which the bees plaster the inside of
their hives, viii. 72 Proportion of the human figure, little known with
precision in regard to it, ii. 106 -- different opinions upon the subject, ii.
107 Prospect, sketch of a delightful African prospect, on the banks of a most
dreadful river, i. 220 Provider of the lion, what has given rise to the
jackall's being called so, ii. 322 -- also why the siagush is called by that
name, iii. 266 Psalmodi, in France, an island in A. D. 815, now more than six
miles from the shore, i. 277 Ptarmigan, sort of grous, chiefly found in heathy
mountains, and piny forests, at a distance from mankind -- size and color, v.
199 Pthiriasis, the lousy disease, frequent among the ancients -- principal
people who died of this disorder, vii. 274 -- plants and animals are infested
with diseases of this kind -- a vegetable louse from America overrun all the
physic-garden of Leyden, vii. 275 -- the leaf-louse described vii. 276 -- the
males have four wings, the females never have any, vii. 278 -- when they
perceive the ant behind them, they kick back with their hind feet, vii. 279 --
three principal and constant enemies to these insects, vii. 280 Puffin, or
coulterneb, marks that distinguish this bird, vi. 99 -- its residence, vi. 101
-- migrations, 101, 105 -- found by hundreds, cast away upon shores, lean and
perished with famine, vi. 101 -- lays one egg -- few birds or beasts venture to
attack its retreats -- in what manner it defends itself against the raven, vi.
102 -- the manks puffin is itself one of the most terrible invaders --
instances of it -- places which abound with them, vi. 103 -- in what manner
their young are fed -- their food -- formerly their flesh was allowed by the
church on Lenten days -- they bite extremely hard, and keep such hold of what
they seize, as not easily disengaged, vi. 104 -- their noise, when taken, very
disagreeable, like the efforts of a dumb person attempting to speak, vi. 105 --
quantity of oil in their bodies, vi. 106 Puget, adapted the cornea of a fly in
such a position, as to see objects through it by the means of a microscope --
strangeness of the representations, viii. 36 Puma, an animal decorated with the
name of American lion, though, when compared, so contemptible as to be inferior
to that called the American tiger, iii. 232 Pump, the air-pump, an instrument
contrived to exhaust the air from a round vessel, called a receiver -- in what
manner it acts, i. 307 -- explained in an experiment upon a carp placed under
such a receiver, vi. 169 Purre, a small bird of the crane-kind, with a shorter
bill, and thighs bare of feathers, vi. 23 Puteoli, a city swallowed up by an
earthquake, had a temple of Serapis, the pillars of which, while under water,
were penetrated by the pholas, or file-fish, vii. 67 Putrefaction, a new cause
of animal life -- later discoveries have induced many to doubt whether animal
life cannot be produced merely from thence, ii. 22 Pyramids of Egypt, one of
them entirely built of a kind of freestone, in which petrified shells are
found in great abundance, i. 47 Pyrard, his account of a kind of apes called
baris, which properly instructed when young, serve as useful domestics, iv. 198
Pygmy of Tyson, is the ouran-outang, or the wild man of the wood, iv. 189
Pyrites, their composition -- sulphur and iron blended and heated with air or
water, will form these and marcasites, i. 77
Q.
Quadrupeds, of all ranks of animated nature, they bear the nearest resemblance
to man, ii. 310 -- are less changed by influence of climate or food, than the
lower ranks of nature -- some are of so equivocal a nature, it is hard to tell
whether they ought to be ranked in this class, or degraded to those below them,
ii. 312 -- instances of it, ii. 313 -- some formed for the surface of the
fields, others framed to live upon the tops of trees, and others made to dwell
under the earth, iv. 90 -- of all kinds, none so justly reproach the natural
historian's inaccuracy, as that which bears the musk, iii. 88 -- the weaker
races exert all efforts to avoid their invaders, ii. 323, 324 -- next to human
influence, the climate seems to have the strongest effects upon their nature
and form, ii. 328 -- both at the line and the pole, the wild are fierce and
untameable, ii. 330 -- one class of these entirely left to chance; no parent
stands forth to protect them, and no instructor leads, or teaches them arts of
subsistence; these bring forth above two hundred young at a time, ii. 339 -- of
all quadrupeds, the elephant the strongest and the largest, iv. 254 -- none
that will not breed in its own native climate, except the elephant, under the
dominion of man, iv. 269 -- the most untractable, and for its size, the most
terrible of all, the hyaena, iii. 343 -- the mouse most feeble, and most timid
of all, except the guinea-pig, iv. 72 -- the largest are found in the torrid
zone, iii. 28 -- and these are all fond of the water, iii. 29 -- America
inferior to us in these productions -- opinion, that all in South America are a
different species from those most resembling them in the old world, ii. 332 --
such as peculiarly belong to the new continent are without any marks of the
perfection of their species, ii. 333 -- the only that migrate from one part of
the world to another are the seals, iv. 174 -- their heads different from each
other, are adapted to their way of living; and how, ii. 314 -- the large and
formidable produce but one young at a time; while the mean and contemptible are
prolific, ii. 334 -- it has been wisely ordered so by Providence, ii. 335 --
the change of color in the hair, obtains in them all to a degree plainly
observable, iii. 354 -- it is observable, that a thin sparing diet produces
hair, iii. 355 -- none fatter, none more sleek, or of glossy skin, than the
mole, iv. 91 -- the hog in a wild state most delicate in the choice of
vegetables, and rejects a greater number than any other animal, iii. 176 -- the
carnivorous have not milk in plenty, iii. 366 -- are not fond of engaging each
other, iii. 369 -- those that ruminate are harmless, and easily tamed, iii. 1
-- they are chiefly the cow, the sheep, and the deer-kind, iii. 5 -- the
chevrotin, or little guinea-deer, the least of all cloven-footed animals, and
perhaps the most beautiful -- its description, iii. 82 -- none can be more
beautiful than the tiger, iii. 233 -- those that are amphibious have motion in
the lower eyelid alone, ii. 85 -- general description of amphibious
quadrupeds, iv. 148 -- medicines procured from them, iii. 69 Quail, a bird of
passage, v. 212 -- description of it -- time of its migrations, v. 32, 212, 213
-- opinion, that it only goes from one part of a country to another -- their
long journies doubtful, v. 213 -- how caught by a call -- number of their eggs
-- fight desperately at the season of courtship, and easily taken at that time,
v. 214 Quail-fighting, a favorite amusement among the Athenians -- abstained
from the flesh of this bird, supposing it fed upon white hellebore -- reared
numbers of them for fighting, and betted sums of money, as we do no cocks, v.
214 Quarry of Maestricht, i. 63 -- forty thousand people may take shelter in it
-- description of it, i. 64 Quicksilver, remarkable effects of it at the mines
near Idra, related by Dr. Pope in the Philosophical Transactions, i. 79 -- the
heaviest substance in the world, except gold -- floats upon water by a
particular experiment, i. 188 -- seventy-one pounds and an half found equal in
bulk to a hundred pound weight of gold, i. 190 Quills of the porcupine; the
Indians embroider with them their belts, baskets, and several other necessary
pieces of furniture, iv. 112 -- enquiry whether the quills of the porcupine can
be sent off with a shake, iv. 113 Quito, in South America, capital city of, one
of the most charming regions upon earth -- this part higher than any other
country in the world, i. 150 -- chase of the wild ass in that kingdom, ii. 379
R.
Rabbit, a ruminating animal, iii. 5 -- rabbit and hare distinct kinds --
refuse to mix with each other -- instance of it -- a creature covered with
feathers and hair, said to be bred between a rabbit and an hen, iv. 15 -- have
eyes of a red color, ii. 83 -- few quadrupeds can overtake the rabbit in a
short run, iv. 1, 2 -- their fecundity greater than that of the hare -- breed
seven times a year, and bring eight young each time, iv. 16 -- love the sunny
field, and open pasture -- the female suckles the young about a month -- the
male attends the young, leads them out, and conducts them back -- have an
external retreat at a distance from the warren, as a kind of country house, iv.
17 -- female brings forth in a part of the warren, separate from the male, and
digs herself a hole, more intricate, at the bottom of which is a more ample
apartment -- some hair she pulls from her belly makes a bed for her young, iv.
18 -- the male after six weeks acknowleges them as his offspring, smooths their
skin, and licks their eyes, iv. 19 Rabbits (tame) in a warren, continue exposed
to weather, without burrowing -- in two or three generations they find the
necessity and convenience of an asylum, iv. 19, 20 -- various colors of
rabbits -- the mouse-colour kinds originally from an island in the river Humber
-- still continuing their general color, after a number of successive
generations -- account of their production, iv. 20 -- surprising obedience and
submission of descendents to their common parent -- the descendents
quarrelling, his appearance restores peace and order -- sometimes he punishes
them, as an example to the rest -- other instances of superiority of the common
parent -- the rabbit generally fatter, and lives longer than the hare -- its
flesh less delicate, iv. 21 -- native of the warmer climates -- it has been
imported into England from Spain -- in some of the islands of the Mediterranean
they multiplied in such numbers, that military aid was demanded to destroy them
-- love a warm climate -- English counties most noted for them -- delight in a
sandy soil, iv. 22 -- the tame larger than the wild -- indulged into great
plenty of moist food, as the feeders express it, are apt to grow rotten --
their hair employed in England for several purposes -- the skin of the male
preferred, iv. 23 Rabbit (Syrian), remarkable for the length, gloss, and
softness of its hair, iii. 212, and iv. 23 -- in some places curled at the end
like wool, and shed once a year in large masses; and some part dragging on the
ground, appears like another leg, or a longer tail, iv. 23, 24 -- no rabbits
natural in America -- those carried from Europe multiply in the West India
islands abundantly; on the continent there are animals resembling the European
rabbits, iv. 24 Rabbit (Brasilian), shaped like the English, but without a tail
-- does not burrow like ours, and is not above twice the size of a dor-mouse,
iv. 54 -- Guinea-pig placed by Brisson among animals of the rabbit-kind, iv. 55
Racoon, with some the Jamaica rat -- its description, iv. 333 -- and habits --
do more injury in one night in Jamaica, than the labors of a month can repair,
iv. 334 -- capable of being instructed in amusing tricks; drinks by lapping as
well as by sucking -- its food, iv. 334, 335 Rains of blood, the excrements of
an insect at that time raised into the air, i. 390 Rainbows, circular rainbows
in the Alps, i. 145 -- and between the tropics and near the poles, i. 377 --
one of the three rainbows seen by Ulloa, at Quito, was real, the rest only
reflections thereof -- a glass globe, filled with water, will assume
successively all the colors of the rainbow, i. 385 -- upon the tops of very
high mountains circular rainbows are seen, and why, i. 386 -- a lunar rainbow,
near the poles, appears of a pale white, striped with gray, i. 387 -- the solar
rainbow, in Greenland, appears of a pale white, edged with a stripe of dusky
yellow, i. 388 Rain fowl, the name given in some parts of the country to the
wood-pecker, and why, v. 249 Rams, it is no uncommon thing in the counties of
Lincoln and Warwick, to give fifty guineas for a ram, iii. 44 Ranguer, the name
of the ninth variety of gazelles made by Mr. Buffon, iii. 78 Rapacious, in the
rapacious kinds the dam leads her young forth for months together, iv. 6
Rarefaction of air, produced by the heat of the sunbeams in countries under the
line, being flat and sandy, low and extensive, as the deserts of Africa, i. 344
Rats, musk rat, three distinctions of that species -- the ondatra, desman, and
pilori -- the ondatra differs from all others, having the tail flatted and
carried edge-ways -- in what they resemble each other, iv. 78 -- female of the
ondatra has two apertures, one for urine, the other for propagation -- they can
creep into a hole where others, seemingly much less, cannot follow, and why --
they resemble the beaver in nature and disposition -- manner of life -- their
houses during winter are covered under a depth of eight or ten feet of snow,
iv. 79, 80 -- the savages of Canada think the musk-rat intolerably foetid, but
deem its flesh good eating, iv. 80 -- great rat, called also rat of Norway,
though unknown in all northern countries -- originally from the Levant, and a
new comer into this country -- first arrival upon the coasts of Ireland, with
ships trading in provisions to Gibraltar, a single pair enough for the numerous
progeny now infesting the British empire -- called by Mr. Buffon the surmalot
-- its description, iv. 65, 66 -- the Norway rat, has destroyed the black rat,
or common rat, as once called, iv. 66 -- and, being of an amphibious nature,
has also destroyed the frogs in Ireland -- great mischief done by the Norway
rat, iv. 67 -- it swims with ease, dives with celerity, and soon thins the fish
pond -- the feebler animals do not escape the rapacity of the Norway rat,
except the mouse -- they eat and destroy each other -- the large male keeps in
a hole by itself, and dreaded by its own species, as a most formidable enemy --
produce from fifteen to thirty at a time; and bring forth three times a year,
iv. 68 -- quadrupeds avhich have antipathies against the rat, iv. 69 -- the
black rat has propagated in America in great numbers, introduced from Europe,
and are become the most noxious animals there -- its description -- black
water-rat, not web-footed, as fspposed by Ray -- its description, iv. 71 -- its
food -- is eat, in some countries, on fasting days, iv. 72 -- the nux vomica,
ground and mixed with meal, the most certain poison, and the least dangerous to
kill rats, iv. 70 -- the German rat described, iv. 81 -- their sagacity in
constructing their habitations, iv. 82 Rat of Surinam. See Phalanger. Rat of
Jamaica, a name by some given to the racoon, iv. 333 Rattle-snake, its
description, and dimensions, vii. 208 -- effects of its bite, vii. 211 -- the
remedies against it, vii. 212 -- power of charming its prey into its mouth --
facts related to this purpo -- e, vii. 213 -- kind of friendship between it and
the armadilla, or tatou, frequently found in the same hole, iv. 131 Ravens how
distinguished from the carrion-crow and rook, v. 224 -- manners and appetites
-- raven found in every region of the world, v. 225 -- white ravens often
shown, and rendered so by art, v. 226 -- trained up for fowling like a hawk;
taught to fetch and carry like a spaniel -- to speak like a parrot; and to sing
like a man, with distinctness, truth, and humor -- amusing qualities, vices,
and defects -- food in the wild state, v 226, 227 -- places for building nests
-- number of eggs -- will not permit their young to keep in the same district,
but drive them off when sufficiently able to shift for themselves -- three of
the Western Islands occupied by a pair of ravens each, that drive off all other
birds with great cries and impetuosity -- pick out the eyes of sheep and lambs
when sick and helpless, v. 228 -- the Romans thought it ominous, and from fear
paid it profound veneration -- Pliny's account of one kept in the temple of
Castor, and flew down into the shop of a tailor -- some have lived near a
hundred years -- in clear weather they fly in pairs to a great height, making a
deep loud noise, different from their usual croaking, v. 229, 230 -- the horned
Indian raven, v. 235 Ravenna, once stood by the seaside, and is now
considerably removed from it, i. 276 Ray, his method of classing animals, ii.
294 Ray, figure of the fish of this kind, and their differences, vi. 248 --
amazing dimensions of one speared by negroes at Guadaloupe, vi. 251 -- to
credit the Norway bishop, there are some above a mile over -- supposed to be
the largest inhabitants of the deep -- chooses its retreat in such parts of the
sea as have a black muddy bottom -- the small approach the shores -- their food
-- they generate in March and April, when they swim near the surface of the
water, several males pursuing one female, vi. 352 -- adhere so fast in coition,
that the fishermen frequently draw up both together, though only one was hooked
-- three hundred eggs taken out of the body of a ray -- in what manner the eggs
drop into the womb from the ovary, or egg-bag -- breeding ceases in October,
and in May are in highest perfection, vi. 253 -- account of the method of
taking them, vi. 254 -- all extremely delicate in their choice of baits; a
piece of herring or haddock twelve hours out of the sea, and then used as a
bait, they will not touch -- best weather for taking them, vi. 257 -- method
used by the Italians in the Mediterranean to take this fish -- they bait a line
of twenty miles long, with ten or twelve thousand hooks, vi. 258 -- no way of
seizing the rough ray, but by the little fin at the end of the tail, vi. 259
Rays of light moderated, and their violence dissipated by the air, i. 334 Rays
of the sun, darted directly upon the surface of the water, compared to so many
bars of red-hot iron, i. 370 Razor-fish, the coryphaena of the prickly-finned
thoracic kind -- its description, vi. 307 Razor-shell, the pivot, its motion
and habits, vii. 52 -- is allured by salt, vii. 53 Reaumur, his chemical
elaboratory for hatching chickens, v. 168 Red-breast, a song bird, seemingly
mild; claims a district, whence it seldom moves, but drives away every one of
the same species without pity, v. 31 -- its voice has the delicacy of the flute
-- places where found, v. 332 -- its nest, and the number of eggs, v. 333 Red
start, bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 314 Red-wing, or field-fare, bird of
passage -- its nest and eggs, v. 323 Reed, stuck into the ground in Persia,
where the earth is impregnated with inflammable vapors, continues to burn like
a flambeau, i. 86 Reeve, name given to the female of the ruff, vi. 34
Reflection of sound, its laws not as well understood as those of light, ii. 171
Regions, the highest region in the world, i. 150 -- above that of storms, all
is calm and serene, i. 253 Reindeer, killed by eight Englishmen upon the coast
of Greenland, for their subsistence, remained sweet eight months, without any
salt whatever, i. 314, 315. For the description of this animal see Deer.
Relievo, painters can never fully imitate that bold relievo, which both eyes
give to the object, ii. 150 Remora, the sucking-fish, it sticks to the shark,
and drains away its moisture; the seamen believe it attends the shark to point
out prey; and apprize him of danger; for this reason it is called the shark's
pilot, vi. 246 Reproduction, the first discovery of the power of reproduction
in animals owing to Mr. Trembley -- experiments made to this purpose, viii. 172
Reptiles, grow to a prodigious size in the internal parts of South America and
Africa, and why, ii. 6, 332 -- many of the more humble kinds not only confined
to one country, but to a plant; nay, even to a leaf, ii. 7 -- entirely
assimilated to the plant they feed on; assume its color, and medicinal
properties -- taken from that, they instantly die -- infinite numbers of them
not seen in this part of the world, and why, ii. 8 Resemblance to the common
parent of all, the olive colored Asiatic, and the jet black negroe, claim the
honor of hereditary resemblance to him -- argument sufficing to prove the
contrary, ii. 240 -- difficult to give a reason why the child should resemble
the father or the mother, ii. 248 Respiration in fishes, general method of
explaining it, vi. 170 -- particularly in that of the whale kind, vi. 186
Retreat of the rabbits, an external hole at a distance from the warren, as a
kind of country house, iv. 17 Rhine, a great river, proceeds from the Alps, i.
142 -- part of it lost in the sands, not far from Leyden, i. 224 -- the
greatest part arrives at the ocean, i. 225 Rhinoceros, a ruminating animal,
iii. 5 -- not afraid singly to oppose the lion, iii. 225 -- next to the
elephant the most powerful of animals -- general out-line of it, iv. 285, 286
-- the elephant defeated by it, iv. 287 -- its horn sometimes found from three
to three feet and an half long -- this horn composed of the most solid
substance, and pointed so as to inflict the most fatal wounds, iv. 286 --
fabulous reports of this animal, iv. 287 -- description of its tongue by
L'Avocat -- a rhinoceros sent from Bengal to London, not above two years old,
cost near a thousand pounds for his conveyance and food -- how it was fed -- of
a gentle disposition, permitted itself to be touched and handled by all
visitors, attempting no mischief but when abused, or hungry; no method of
appeasing its fury then but by giving it something to eat -- when angry, it
jumped against the walls of the room with great violence, iv. 288 -- its age --
its food -- places where found, iv. 289 -- in some parts of Asia, these animals
are tamed, and led into the field to strike terror into the enemy, but are as
dangerous to the employers -- method of taking them -- some found in Africa
with a double horn, one above the other, iv. 290 -- many medicinal virtues
ascribed to this horn, when taken in powder, without any foundation, iv. 291
Rivers, all our greatest find their source among mountains, i. 142 -- their
production, according to De la Hire, i. 194 -- other hypotheses upon the same
subject, i. 196 -- the copious fountains of the greatest most remote from the
sea, i. 198 -- channels of rivers originally formed by the industry of man,
according to Varenius i. 200 -- make their own beds, and level the bottom of
their channels, i. 201, 202 -- rivers dig and widen themselves, to a certain
degree, i. 202 -- their banks appear above water, after inundations, when the
adjacent valley is overflown, and why, i. 202, 203 -- their sinuosities and
turnings more numerous as they proceed -- a certain sign with the savages of
North America, they are near the sea, when they find the rivers winding and
often changing their direction, i. 203 -- rivers rise in in the middle, and the
convexity is in proportion to the rapidity of the stream, i. 204 -- when tides
flow up with violence against the natural current, the greatest rapidity is
then found at the sides of the river, and why -- at these times, the middle
waters sink in a furrow, i. 204, 205 -- a little river received into a large,
without augmenting either width or depth, and why, i. 207 -- instance of it --
a river tending to enter another either perpendicularly or in an opposite
direction, will be diverted by degrees from that direction, and obliged to make
itself a more favorable entrance with the stream of the former -- the union of
two rivers into one makes a swifter flow, and why -- whatever direction the
ridge of the mountain has, the river takes the opposite course, i. 208 -- their
branches compared to a number of roots conveying nourishment to stately trees
-- equally difficult to tell which the original, i. 217 -- every great river,
whose source lies within the tropics, has its stated inundations, i. 218 --
those of countries least inhabited are very rocky and broken into cataracts,
and why, i. 221 -- some lose themselves in the sands or are swallowed up by
charms in the earth, i. 224 -- at the poles necessarily small, and why, i. 225,
226 -- the rivers of Europe more navigable and more manageable than those of
Africa and of the torrid zone, i. 226 -- all rivers in the world flowing into
the sea with a continuance of their present stores, would take up, at a rude
computation, eight hundred years to fill it to its present height, i. 228
Robin-red-breast, a slender-billed bird of the sparrow-kind, living upon
insects, v. 314 Rock, great bird, described by Arabian writers, and exaggerated
by fable, supposed to be but a species of the condor, between the eagle and
vultur, v. 105 Rocks and precipices, those of St. Kilda are more than
three-quarters of a mile perpendicularly -- description of a very bold coast,
vi. 78 Roe-buck, the smallest of the deer-kind in our climate -- its
description, iii. 131 -- differs from the fallow-deer, from the stag, and from
all the goat-kind, iii. 132 -- faces the stag, and often comes off victorious
-- these bucks live in separate families; the sire, dam, and young associate,
and admit no-stranger into their community, iii. 133 -- never leaves its mate
-- rutting season continues but fifteen days, from the end of October to the
middle of November -- female goes with young five months and a half, iii. 134
-- produces two at a time, and three rarely -- her tenderness in protecting
them very extraordinary, iii. 135 -- names given by hunters to the different
kinds and ages of it, iii. 136 -- time of shedding its horns, iii. 137 -- its
life seldom longer than twelve or fifteen years; and tame, not above six or
seven -- is of a delicate constitution -- easily subdued, but never thoroughly
tamed -- its cry neither so loud nor so frequent as the stags -- hunters easily
imitate the call of the young to the dam, and thus allure her to destruction,
iii. 138 -- this animal contented to slake its thirst with the dew on the grass
and leaves of trees -- prefers tender branches and buds of trees to corn and
other vegetables -- we have but two known varieties -- the flesh of those
between one and two years old the greatest delicacy known -- more common in
America than in Europe -- inhabitants of Louisiana live upon its flesh, which
tastes like mutton when well fatted -- the breed extremely numerous, and the
varieties in proportion, iii. 139 -- found also in Brasil, where called
cuguacu-apara; and in China -- its describers there confound it with the
musk-goat, though of a different nature, iii. 140 Roger de Belegme, the first
recorded for attempts toward mending our native breed of horses, ii. 370 Roger
of Sicily, at his return from the Holy Land, brought workmen for the silk
manufactory from Asia Minor, and settled them in Sicily and Calabria, in the
beginning of the twelfth century, viii. 50 Roller, a beautiful bird of the
pie-kind; its description, v. 242 Romans cut down all the woods and forests in
Britain, and why, i. 286 -- in battle, opened their ranks to admit the
elephant, and separating it from assistance compelled its conductors to calm
its fury and submit, iv. 277 -- the vanity of their boasts best shown by the
parrot-kind, in a hundred species now known, not one of those birds naturally
breeds in any of the countries that acknowledged the Roman power, v. 283 -- a
Roman emperor had fifteen hundred flamingos tongues served up in a single-dish
at a feast, vi. 15 -- a Roman senator used to throw into his ponds such of his
slaves as offended him, to feed the lampreys, vi. 274 -- infamous for a Roman
to appear in a dress, in which silk entered into the composition, viii. 49
Rombald, a holy temperate man said to have lived a hundred and twenty years,
cheerful by strong hopes, and healthy by moderate labor, ii. 132 Rocks, of the
pie-kind; not carnivorous, v. 330 -- places where they build their nests --
their plan of policy, v. 231 -- young couples making nests too near an old
pair, a battle ensues, and the old become victorious -- fatigues of the young
in making nests, v. 233, 234 -- the female beginning to lay, all hostilities
cease, and she is suffered to hatch her brood without molestation -- a foreign
rook attempting to join society with them, would have the grove in arms against
him, and be expelled without mercy, v. 234 -- their chief food, v. 235 Roses,
otter of roses, a modern delicate perfume, iii. 394 Rousette, the great bat of
Madagascar, a formidable creature, described, iv. 141 -- drinks the juice of
the palm tree, iv. 142 Royston-crow, a bird of passage, described, v. 230
Rubeth, the land-toad, the only one of the kind that has the property of
sucking cancerous breasts, vii. 105 Ruff, small bird of the crane-kind, vi. 33
-- manner of taking it, vi. 34 -- their flesh in high estimation, vi. 35
Ruminant animals most harmless and easily tamed -- generally go in herds for
mutual security -- live entirely upon vegetables, iii. 1 -- the meanest of them
unite in each other's defense -- are more indolent and less artful than the
carnivorous kinds, and why -- nature has enlarged the capacity of their
intestines for a greater supply of food, iii. 2 -- their bowels considered as
an elaboratory with vessels in it, iii. 3 -- made their intestines strong,
fleshy, and well covered with fat, iii. 4 -- and furnished them with four
strong and muscular stomachs, iii. 3 and 5 -- some that are not furnished with
four stomachs -- ruminant quadrupeds, birds, fishes, insects, iii. 5, 6 -- men
known to ruminate; instance in a young man at Bristol, iii. 6 -- those of the
cow-kind hold the first rank, iii. 8 -- all of this class internally much
alike, iii. 36 -- have not the upper fore-teeth, iii. 44 -- the stag performs
this with more difficulty than the cow or sheep, iii. 106 Runner, the corrira,
bird of the crane-kind, its description, vi. 21 Runts, a variety of tame
pigeons, produced by cross-coupling, v. 293 Russian soldiers and condemned
criminals sent into Siberia to kill sables, both taxed at a certain number of
skins yearly -- a colonel, during seven years stay, gains about four thousand
crowns for his share, iii. 375 Rust, copper and iron quickly covered and
corroded with it -- gold contracts no rust, and why, except in the
elaboratories where salt is much used, i. 313 Rut, time when the stags feel the
desire of copulating, iii. 101, 102 -- their neck is then swollen -- other
effects which it causes in stags, iii. 102 -- their voice at that time
terrible, iii. 106
S.
Sable, its description, from Mr. Jonelin, the first accurate observer of this
animal, iii. 373 -- sables leap with ease from tree to tree, and are afraid of
the sun -- different colors of their fur, iii. 374 -- hunting the sable
chiefly the lot of soldiers and condemned criminals -- how directed to shoot
then, iii. 375 Sabre, the trachepterus, description of this spinous fish, vi.
309 Sacre, bird of the generous breed of hawks, the legs are of a blueish
color, and serve to distinguish it, v. 122 Sago tree eat by the elephant to
the stump, iv. 259 Sai, the bewailer, a monkey of the new continent, iv. 236
Sail, a stag hard hunted, taking to the water, is said to go sail, iii. 114
Saines, name of the nets used in the pilchard-fishery on the coast of Cornwall,
vi. 332 Sajou, third sort of the sapajou, a monkey of the new continent, iv.
236 Saki, the cagui, the largest monkey of the sagoin kind -- its description,
iv. 237 Sal ammoniac, trade of the urine of camels, iv. 311 Salamander, there
is no such animal existing as that described by the ancients -- the modern
salamander a lizard -- its conformation and habits, vii. 139 -- reports
concerning their venom, vii. 140 -- idle notion of its being inconsumable in
fire, vii. 142 -- internal conformation of the lizard, vii. 143 -- manner of
its bringing forth young alive, all amphibious, vii. 145 -- sustain want of
food surprisingly, vii. 146 Saliva, in the lama, or American camel, supplied by
nature in such abundance, that it spits on all occasions, and seems the only
offensive weapon of this harmless creature -- the Indians think it of so
acrimonious a nature, as to burn the skin, or cause dangerous eruptions, iv.
315 Salmon, said to be a ruminating fish, iii. 5 -- a soft-finned abdominal
fish, vi. 313 -- the young continue in the egg from the beginning of December
till the beginning of April, vi. 180 Salt water, opinions about the saltness of
the sea, particularly that of Boil, i. 234 -- method of finding out the age of
the world by the saltness of the ocean, i. 235 -- saltness found to prevail in
every part of the ocean, as much at the surface as at the bottom -- also found
in some lakes, i. 236 -- considered as a principal cause in preserving the sea
from putrefaction -- it is confirmed by experiments, i. 239, 240 -- advantages
derived from the saltness of the sea, i. 241 -- various attempts to make it
fresh, i. 237 -- its weight, i. 241 See Sea water. Salt, Bay Salt, brought from
the Bay of Biscay, a strong kind made by evaporation in the sun, i. 241 --
fishes do not imbibe any of the saltness of the seawater, vi. 321 -- destroys
snails, vii. 25 -- allures the pivot, or razor-shell, vii. 53 -- salt sprinkled
upon the water-lizard, the whole body emits a viscuous liquor, and it dies in
three minutes, in great agonies, vii. 146 -- volatile caustic salt obtained in
great quantity from the cantharides fly, viii. 143 Sameyel, a wind along the
coasts of the Persian Gulf, which assumes a visible form, and instantly kills
all those involved in its passage; i. 358 Samiri, the aurora, the smallest and
most beautiful monkey of the sapajou kind -- its description -- a very tender
delicate animal, and held in high price, iv. 336 Samoeid Tartars, description
of that people, ii. 213 Sanctorian statical experiments upon a weak foundation,
ii. 111 Sand, rolling in waves like a troubled sea, and overwhelming all with
inevitable destruction, i. 13 -- fine vitrifiable, found in a well dug at
Marly, i. 57 -- so fine, and driven with such violence, as to penetrate into
chests, be they shut never so closely, i. 357 -- tract of a country, lying
along the seaside in Lower Brittany, inhabited before the year 1666, now lies
desert, being covered with sand to the height of twenty feet, i. 364
Sanderling, small bird of the crane-kind, vi. 23 Sandpiper, small bird of the
crane-kind, vi. 23 Santorin, an earthquake happened in it in 1707, i. 126 --
the new volcano near it, i. 127 Sapajou, name given to the monkies of the new
continent, that have muscular holding tails -- five sorts of them, iv. 235
Savages more difficult in point of dress than the fashionable or tawdry
European, ii. 98 -- instance of it, ii. 97 -- perform a journey of twelve
hundred leagues in less than six weeks, ii. 115 -- oblige their women to a life
of continual labor -- is surprised a European walks forward for his amusement
and return back again, ii. 121 -- the boast of corporal force now resigned to
savage nations, and why, ii. 119 -- are highly delighted with the smell of
asafoetida, ii. 181 -- their customs in every country almost the same, ii. 230
-- those of Africa the most brutal -- they and those of America, suppose
monkies to be men, idle, slothful, rational beings, capable of speech and
conversation, but obstinately dumb for fear of being compelled to labor, iv.
231 Sauce made with the blood and marrow of the reindeer, and kept for use in
small casks by the Laplanders, iii. 167 Savoyards, the only chimney-sweepers of
Paris carry about for show the marmotte bred in their native country, iv. 39
Scallop, in its shell, moves forward upon land, and swims upon the surface of
the water, by contrivance in a singular manner, vii. 51 Scar, a child
distinctly marked similar to one the father had from a wound received in
battle, ii. 238 Scarus, if we believe Ovid, is, like the salmon, a ruminating
fish, iii. 6 Scaup-duck, a variety of the duck-kind, vi. 130 Scent, the negroes
of Guinea have an insupportable scent, ii. 226 Schotius assures us, he saw an
instance of fishes being allured by music, ii. 168 Sciaena, a spinous fish --
description of this fish, vi. 308 Scolopendra, the centipes, a hideous angry
worm, described, vii. 302, 303 Somber, the mackarel, a prickly-finned thoracic
fish -- its description, vi. 307 Scooper, bird of the crane-kind, chiefly found
in Italy, vi 20 See Avosetta. Scorpaena, or father-lasher, of the
prickly-finned thoracic kind -- description of this fish, vi. 308 Scorpion,
four principal parts distinguishable in this animal, vii. 292 -- the reservoir
where its poison is kept, vii. 293 -- effects of its sting upon a dog, in an
experiment made by M. Maupertuis, vii. 294 -- experiments made upon other dogs,
vii. 295 -- instances of its irascible nature and malignity, vii. 297 -- when
driven to extremity, destroys itself, vii. 298 -- instance of it -- the male
smaller than the female, vii. 299 -- their chief food, vii. 300 -- how the
common scorpion produces its young, vii. 299, 300 -- captivity makes it destroy
its young -- a scorpion of America produced from the egg, vii. 301
Water-Scorpion, an insect with wings, described, vii. 359 -- its habits, vii.
360 Scoter, an European duck, vi. 129 Scotland has land in it at one time
covered with water, at another free, i. 279 -- not infested with wolves, iii.
319 Scotchman, in the Tower for felony, took not the least sustenance during
six weeks, the records of that fortress mentioning his being exactly watched
all that time, ii. 133 Sea was open to all till the time of the emperor
Justinian, i. 232 -- sensibly retired in many parts of the coasts of France,
England, Holland, Germany, and Prussia, i. 275 -- Norwegian sea has formed
several little islands from the main land, and still daily advances upon the
continent, i. 278 -- its color not from any thing floating in it, but from the
different reflections of the rays of light -- a proof of it -- though its
surface be deformed by tempests, it is usually calm and temperate below, i. 292
-- the sea grows colder in proportion as diverse descend, i. 292, 293 -- smokes
like an oven near the poles, when the winter begins, i. 386 -- no fish imbibe
any of the sea-saltness with food or in respiration -- why some species live
only there, and expire when brought into fresh water, accounted for, vi. 321
Red Sea choked up with coraline substances, i. 288 and viii. 192 -- along some
shores, and at the mouths of several rivers, the bottom has the appearance of a
forest of trees, millions of plants standing so thick as to obstruct
navigation, viii 191 Sea-eggs, name given to the multivalve shell fish, of the
echini, or urchins, which move, vii. 61 Sea-nettles, name given by some to the
star-fish, viii. 175 Seawater about a forty-fifth part heavier than fresh
water, i. 241 -- is heavier, and consequently salter, the nearer we approach
the line, i. 242 -- various methods proposed to render it fresh for the use of
seamen in long voyages, i. 237. See Salt water. Sea-worm may be multiplied by
being cut in pieces, ii. 23. See Polypus. Seal resembles a quadruped in some
respects, and a fish in others, ii. 313 and iv. 168 -- its description -- the
varieties innumerable, iv. 168, 169 -- the brain largest of any animal -- its
tongue differs from other quadrupeds, iv. 170 -- the foramen ovale in its heart
never closing, fits it for continuing under water, though not so long as
fishes, iv. 171 -- the water its habitation, and any fish its food -- makes
little use of its legs, iv. 172 -- seldom at a distance from the shore -- found
in the North and Icy Seas, and on those shores in flocks, basking on the rocks
and suckling their young -- alarmed, they plunge all together into the water --
in thunder and torrents they sport along the shore, as delighted with universal
disorder, iv. 173 -- gregarious and migrant, direct their course to northern
coasts and seas free of ice, in two departures, observing time and track, iv.
174 -- how and by what passages they return unknown -- they go out fat and
return lean -- females in our climate bring forth in winter -- where they rear
their young -- how they suckle them -- she has four teats near the navel -- in
fifteen days, she brings the young to the water, to swim and get food -- no
litter exceeds four -- the young know the mother's voice among the bleatings of
the old -- assist each other in danger, and are obedient to her call, iv. 175
-- hunt and herd together, and have a variety of tones like dogs and cats, to
pursue prey, or warn of danger -- feeling natural desires, they fight
desperately, and the victorious male keeps all to himself -- two never fall
upon one, each has its antagonist -- neither length of time in pregnancy, nor
duration of these animals lives yet known, iv. 176 -- two taken young, after
ten years had the marks of age -- expert at catching fish -- destroy herrings
by thousands -- swift in deep waters, they dive with rapidity, iv. 177 --
attacked with stones, they bite at what is thrown, and to the last gasp annoy
the enemy -- time to surprise them -- how the Europeans and Greenlanders
destroy them, iv. 178, 179 -- in our climate they are wary, and suffer no
approach -- never sleep without moving, and seldom more than a minute, iv. 179
-- taken for the skin and oil the fat yields -- uses of the skin when dressed
-- the flesh formerly at the tables of the great -- an instance of it, iv. 180
-- the sea-lion, in Anson's Voyages, the largest of the seal family, iv. 181
Sebald Were, a traveller, confirms the existence of giants in St. Julian's Bay,
forty-nine degrees south of the line, ii. 261 Seeds, some thought to thrive
better for maceration in the stomach of birds, before they be voided on the
ground, v. 316 Senegal, a river in Africa, its course -- is navigable for more
than three hundred leagues, i. 212 -- receives more than twenty rivers, i. 217
-- the natives consider forty years as a very advanced time of life, and
generally die of old age at fifty, i. 321 Sensations, their illusion at first
when man is newly brought into existence, described by Mr. Buffon, ii. 187 --
fish fall behind terrestrial animals in their sensations, vi. 159 Senses,
acting at some distance, proportionably more capable of making combinations;
and consequently, more improveable, ii. 178 -- of all senses man is most
inferior to other animals in that of smelling -- and it seems not to offend
them, ii. 179 -- the grossest, and most useful of all, is that of feeling, ii.
185 Sensitive plant, has as much perception as the fresh water polypus, ii. 3
Seps, improper name of the Chalcidian lizard, the last division of that kind --
description of this animal, vii. 157, 158 -- its bite very venomous, vii, 215
Seraglio, to be able to furnish one the only tendency of the ambition of an
Asiatic, ii. 72 Serpents, the sea about the islands of Azores replenished with
them for want of motion, i. 239 -- to believe all said of the sea-serpent, is
credulity; to refuse assent to its existence, is presumption, vi. 193 -- the
various hissings at the close of evening, make a louder symphony in Africa than
birds in European groves in a morning, ii, 321 -- histories of antiquity
exhibit a nation sinking under the ravages of a serpent, vii. 162 -- Regulus
leading his army along the banks of the river Bagrada, in Africa, an enormous
serpent disputed the passage, its skin was an hundred and twenty feet long,
vii. 163 -- marks distinguishing them from the rest of animals -- their
conformation, vii. 165 -- and progressive motion, vii. 171 -- the natural food
of the ichneumon, iii. 379 -- the only animal in the forest that opposes the
monkey -- surprising them sleeping, swallows them whole, before they have time
for defense -- monkies inhabit the tops of trees, and serpents cling to
branches toward the bottom; thus near each other, as enemies in the same field
of battle -- this vicinity thought to argue a friendship -- monkies provoke the
serpents by jumping over them, iv. 220 -- encounter of a great serpent with a
buffalo -- entwines and devours the buffalo, vii. 174 -- long serpent of Congo,
vii. 176 -- some bring their young alive, some bring forth eggs, vii. 184 --
some venomous, and some inoffensive, vii. 186 -- animals which destroy them,
vii. 188 -- boasted pretensions of charming serpents, vii. 189 -- have docility
-- Egyptians paid adoration to a serpent; and inhabitants of the western coast
of Africa retain the same veneration, vii. 190 -- all amphibious, vii. 182 --
their motion, swiming in liquids, vii. 183 -- excrements of some kept as a
pleasing perfume at Calcutta and Cranganon -- the Esculapian serpent, vii. 184
-- little serpent at the Cape of Good Hope, and north of the river Senegal,
vii. 172 -- sea-serpent, the elops described, vi. 310 -- the prince of serpents
a native of Japan, the greatest favorite of savages, and has not its equal for
beauty, vii. 224 -- seat of poison in venomous serpents; instrument by which
the wound is made, vii. 193, 194 -- those destitute of fangs are harmless, vii.
194 -- various appearances the venom produce, vii. 197 -- may be taken inwardly
without sensible effects or prejudice to the constitution, vii. 198 -- instance
of it, 199 -- another of the force of serpents poison, from Ray, vii. 200 -- no
animals bear abstinence so long as they, vii. 178 -- their powers of digestion
but feeble, vii. 179 -- their principal food birds, moles, toads, lizards, vii.
202 -- little serpents live for several years in glasses, never eat at all, nor
stain the glass with excrements, vii. 179 Serval, a native of Malabar,
resembling the panther in its spots, iii. 258 Setter, a dog of the generous
kind, iii. 286, 288 Severn, lamprey of this river the most delicate of all
fish, vi. 270 Shagreen, made of the skin of the wild ass, ii. 377 -- the skin
of the shark, by great labor, polished into the substance called shagreen, vi.
247 Shammoy, a kind of goat, in the mountains of Dauphine, Piedmont, Savoy,
Switzerland, and Germany, iii. 63 -- its description, iii. 65 -- keep in flocks
from four to fourscore, and a hundred -- time of coupling -- live twenty or
thirty years -- their flesh good to eat; the suet from ten or twelve pounds,
iii. 63 -- this animal has a feeble bleat, to call its young; in cases of
danger, its hissing noise is heard at a great distance -- by smell, discovers a
man at half a league, iii. 64 -- feeds upon (...) best herbage, and delicate
parts of plants, and aromatic herbs -- admired for the beauty of its eyes, iii.
65 -- not found in summer, except in caverns of rocks, amidst fragments of ice,
or under shades of spreading trees, iii. 66 -- during winter, it sleeps in the
thicker forests, and feeds upon shrubs and buds of pine-trees, and scratches up
the snow for herbage, iii. 67 -- manner of hunting it -- dogs of useless in the
chase, iii. 68 -- skin of the shammoy when tanned, liked for softness and
warmth; the leather now called shammoy, made from the tame goat, sheep, and
deer, iii. 68, 69 -- medicinal virtues said to reside in the blood, fat, gall,
and the concretion found in the stomach, and called the German bezoar, iii. 69
Shank, the red, and the green shank, varieties of the crane kind -- their
dimensions, vi. 23 Shark, description of the great white shark -- the mouth and
throat enormously wide; capable of swallowing a man, vi. 238 -- great number of
its teeth, vi. 239 -- no fish swims so fast, vi. 155 to 240 -- outstrips the
swiftest ships -- obliged to turn on one side (not on the back) to seize the
prey, vi. 240 -- instances of frightful rapacity in this fish, vi. 241 -- its
enmity to man; along the coasts of Africa, many negroes are seized and devoured
by them yearly, -- loves the black men's flesh better than the white vi. 241,
242 -- usual method of sailors to take them, -- no animal harder to kill; when
cut in pieces, the muscles preserve motion, and vibrate for some minutes
separated from the body, vi. 243, 244 -- how killed by the African negroes, vi.
245 -- the remora, or sucking-fish sticks to it; for what purpose -- for
resemblance to the whale ranked among cetaceous fishes -- brings forth living
young -- Rondeletius says, the female of the blue shark lets her brood, when in
danger, swim down her throat, and shelter in her belly, vi. 245, 246 -- in Mr.
Pennant's opinion, the female is larger than the male, through all this tribe,
vi. 247 Sheat-fish, the siturus of the prickly-finned abdominal kind -- its
description, vi. 310 Sheep, in the domestic state, stupid, most defenseless,
and inoffensive -- made so by human art alone -- its description, iii. 38, 39,
40 -- those living upon fertile pasture, growing fat, become feeble, iii. 40,
41 -- those without horns, more dull and heavy than the rest -- those with
longest and finest fleeces most subject to disorders -- the goat, resembling
them in many other respects, much their superior, iii. 41 -- they propagate
together, as of one family, iii. 35 -- sheep follow the sound of the shepherd's
pipe, iii. 42 -- in course of time impoverish the pasturage, iii. 10 -- they
eat three hundred and eighty-seven plants, and rejects a hundred and forty-one,
iii. 176 -- the author law one that would eat flesh, ii. 327 -- have eight
teeth in the lower jaw -- are shed and replaced at different periods -- some
breeds in England never change teeth, and are supposed old a year or two before
the rest, iii. 44, 45 -- bring forth one or two at a time, sometimes three or
four; the third lamb supposed the best -- bear their young five months, iii. 45
-- their eyes are of a water color, ii. 83 -- and the intestines thirty times
the length of their body, iii. 210 -- do not appear from old writers to have
been bred in early times in Britain, iii. 43 -- to spare the stock queen
Elizabeth enjoined her subjects should fast from flesh on Fridays and
Saturdays, ii. 131 -- no country produces such sheep as England; larger
fleeces, or better for clothing -- sheep without horns the best sort, and why,
iii. 44 -- profitable care taken of the animal produces favorable alterations
in the fleeces here and in Syria, ii. 329 -- the sheep in its noblest state is
in the African desert, or the extensive plains of Siberia, iii. 45 -- the
moufflon, or sheep in the savage state, a bold fleet creature, able to escape
from larger animals, or to oppose smaller kinds with the arms received from
nature; iii. 39 -- the woolly sheep is only in Europe, and in the temperate
provinces of Asia -- transported into warmer countries, as Florida or Guinea,
loses the wool and fertility, and the flesh its flavor -- subsists in cold
countries, but not a natural inhabitant of them, iii. 46 -- the Ireland sheep
have four, and sometimes eight horns, on different parts of the the forehead --
its wool inferior to that of the common sheep -- with broad tails, common in
Tartary, Arabia, Persia, Barbary, Syria, and Egypt; the tail often weighs from
twenty to thirty pounds, and sometimes supported by a small board, upon wheels,
iii. 47 -- those called strepsicheros, a native of the Archipelago -- Guinea
sheep described, iii. 48 -- in Syria and Persia, remarkable for fine gloss,
length, and softness of hair, iii. 212 -- distinguished from deer; these
annually shedding the horns, while the permanence in the former, draws an exact
line between their kinds, iii. 36 Sheldrake, a variety of the pond-duck,
supposed a native of England, vi. 130 Shells, (fossil) found in all places near
to and distant from the sea, upon the surface of the earth, on the tops of
mountains, or at different depths digging for marble, chalk, or other
terrestrial matters, so compact as to preserve these shells from decay, i. 17,
40, 41 -- long considered as mere productions of the earth never inhabited by
fish -- some have not their fellows in the ocean, i. 41, vii. 15 -- but all
have the properties of animal, not of mineral nature; their weight the same
with those upon shore, answer all chemical trials as sea shells do -- and have
the same effects in medicinal uses, i. 41, 42 -- various kinds found at a
hundred miles from the sea at Touraine in France -- a continued bed of
oyster-shells found through the whole circumference of five or six acres of
ground near Reading, in Berkshire -- shells found petrified in all the Alpine
rocks, in the Pyrenees, on the hills of France, England, and Flanders, i. 42,
43 -- a floor, or pavement, of petrified shells found in Kent, near the Medway,
i. 44 -- shells always remaining in the deep, i. 46 -- easier to believe fossil
shells bred in fresh water, than that the sea for a time covered the tops of
high mountains, i. 50 -- petrified shells found in one of the pyramids of
Egypt, i. 47, 48 -- great variety of fossil, or extraneous shells, vii. 15 --
different states of preservation -- every shell the spoil of some animal -- no
matter how parted from the sea, vii. 16 -- Swammerdam's attention to testaceous
animals almost beyond credibility, vii. 17 -- volumes upon the subject of
shells contribute little to the history of shellfish, vii. 2 -- methods of
conveying a just idea of the formation of sea-shells and garden-shells, vii. 3
to 5 -- usual way of accounting for different coloring in shells, vii. 6 --
hint about the operation of nature in coloring shells -- they assume every
color but blue, vii. 7, 8 -- the animal not solely the agent in giving beauty
and coloring to it, vii. 8, 9 -- stairs-shell, or admiral-shell, not more
precious for their scarceness, than pearls for their beauty, vii. 10 --
collections of shells have their use, vii. 11 -- naturally classed by Aristotle
-- places where shells are found, vii. 12 -- and substances of which they are
composed -- supposition that all earths fermenting with vinegar, are composed
of shells, crumbled down to one mass -- what shells most valuable, vii. 13 --
sea-shells exceed land or fossil shells in beauty -- some living land shells
not inferior in beauty to fresh water shells, vii. 14 Shells of the sea, scarce
one met with entire and sound to the end of its convolutions, and why, vii. 34
-- of all sea-shells, that of the nautilus, the thinnest and most easily
pierced, vii. 35 -- all bivalved shells furnish pearls, and their insides
resemble and afford that substance called mother-of-pearl, vii. 53 -- some
pierced by worms argue them food for such animals, vii. 16 Shells, animal, of
the armadilla or tatou, one of the most striking curiosities in natural
history, iv. 126 -- turtle-shells of an amasing magnitude, vi. 399 Sheque
Ismael, in his time the Arabians first began the management of horses, ii. 349
Shetland isles, amasing quantity of herrings appearing off these islands, vi.
329 Shores, of all those in the world, not one so high as that to the west of
St. Kilda, six hundred fathom perpendicular above the surface of the sea, i.
272 -- some on which the sea has made temporary depredations, i. 279
Short-heads, name given by sailors to the young of the whale, whilst at the
breast, vi. 200 Shoveller, species of the crane kind -- its food -- inhabitants
of the Cape of Good Hope respect it as the ancient Egyptians did their bird
ibis, vi. 8 -- its nest and eggs, vi. 9 Shoulders, high in sickly persons --
people dying, are seen with their shoulders drawn up in a surprising manner,
ii. 103 -- women with child also, usually seen high-shouldered, ii. 104 --
shoulders, in women, narrower than in men, ii. 107 Showers, dreadful shower of
hail in 1510 -- its description, i. 376 -- of stones, fishes, and ivy-berries,
raised into the air by tempests in one country, and falling at a distance like
rain, to astonish another, i. 390 Shrewsbury, Roger de Belegme, created earl of
Shrewsbury by William the Conqueror, first upon record to have attempted
mending our native breed of horses, ii. 370 Siagush, called by Mr. Buffon the
caracal, of the lynx-kind, a native of the East Indies, resembles the ounce in
size, iii. 258 -- met with only in warm tropical climates -- used, in the same
manner as the ounce, for hunting, iii. 265 -- called also the lion's provider;
and said when it calls him to pursue prey, its voice resembles that of a man
calling another -- one sent over from the East Indies, could not endure the
change of climate, iii. 266 -- has killed a large dog in single combat; yet
remarkable for cowardice, iii. 267 -- how it makes the gazelle and antelope
easy preys to the hunters, iii. 266 Siberia, the animal between dog and fox,
called isatis, found in this country, and seldom in milder, climates, iii. 340
-- the sable resembling the martin found in this country; soldiers and exiled
criminals hunt it, and furnish annually numbers of its skins, iii. 375 --
enormous tusks found lodged in the sandy banks of the rivers in this waste
country, iv. 282 Sicily and Calabria taught the other kingdoms of Europe the
silk-manufacture, viii. 50 Sighs, in what manner produced -- when invigorated
produce sobbing, ii. 92 Sight, of old men indistinct for bodies close to them,
but more precise for objects at a distance from them, and why, ii. 158 -- of
birds exceeds that of other animals, and excels in strength and precision -- a
kite, from an imperceptible height in the clouds, sees its prey, and darts on
it with unerring aim, v. 10 -- of birds that prey by day, astonishingly quick;
and in such as ravage by night, so fitted as to discern objects in darkness
with precision, v. 80 Signs of death, uncertainty of them ought to make every
one cautious of giving up a friend as dead, and exposing him to real death, or
a premature enterment, ii. 208 to 210 Silks, brought to Jamaica, and there
exposed to the air, rot while they preserve their color, but kept from air
retain their strength and gloss, i. 314 -- anciently so scarce in Rome as to be
sold for their weight in gold; and considered such a luxurious refinement in
dress, that infamy was attached to wearing stuffs in which it made but half the
composition, viii. 49 Silkworm, its real history unknown among the Romans to
the time of Justinian; and supposed only brought into Europe in the twelfth
century, viii. 50 -- two methods of breeding them, viii. 51 -- Pausanias's
description of this worm, viii. 50 -- changes of its skin in three weeks or a
month, viii. 55 -- gummy fluid forming the threads, viii. 56 -- preparations
made before spinning the web, viii. 57 -- the cone or ball of silk described,
viii. 58 -- efforts to burst the cone -- free from confinement, it neither
flies nor eats; the male seeks the female, impregnates her in an uninterrupted
union of four days, then dies upon reparation, the survives till she has laid
her eggs, which are hatched into worms the ensuing spring -- few of these
animals suffered to come to a state of maturity, and why, viii. 59 -- the most
serviceable of all such creatures, viii. 4 Manufactures of silk, established in
Europe, in the beginning of the twelfth century, by Roger of Sicily, viii. 50
Silurus, the sheat fish of the prickly-finned abdominal kind, its description,
vi. 310 Simeon, said to have lived an hundred and twelve years, ii. 132 Sinews
of the reindeer, the strongest kind of sewing thread, iii. 167 Single, name of
the tail of the stag, iii. 113 Siskin, singing bird of the sparrow-kind, with
thick and short bill, feeding on grain and fruit, v. 315 -- time of its
migration, v. 317 Size of men varies considerably, ii. 108 -- the human body
often differs from itself, ii. 110 -- the same person taller when he rises in
the morning, than going to bed at night; sometimes the difference is an inch;
this first perceived in England by a recruiting officer -- in what manner, ii.
108 -- the cause of it, ii. 109 -- men are tall from five feet eight inches to
six feet high -- middle size from five feet five to five feet eight, ii. 108 --
Maximin, the emperor, above nine foot in height, ii. 118 -- approaching toward
the north pole, the natives diminish proportionably; growing less and less in
higher latitudes, ii. 217 -- cause of their difference -- an ox, on the fertile
plains of India, grows four times as large as the lesser animal of the same
kind in the Alps, ii. 237 -- of men in all ages, nearly the same as at present
-- many corroborating proofs of this, ii. 265 Skates, Laplanders make use of
them upon the snow, and how, ii. 215 Skeleton of the bat in some measure
resembles that of man, iv. 135 -- some human lately discovered of enormous size
five, or six feet beneath the surface, on the banks of the Ohio, not far from
the river Miume, in America, iv. 282 Skin, the only part of the body that age
does not harden -- whence its wrinkles proceed, ii. 197 -- of the reindeer, a
more valuable part of the animal than any other -- uses of it, iii. 166 -- of
the tiger, much valued all over the East, iii. 243 -- of the black fox most
esteemed, a single skin selling for forty or fifty crowns -- the hair is so
disposed, that it is impossible to tell which way the grain lies, iii. 333 --
most valuable part of the martin's skin -- twelve thousand of these annually
imported into England from Hudson's bay, and thirty thousand from Canada --
most worth when taken in the beginning of winter, iii. 372 -- of all, that of
the sable most coveted, and held in highest price -- a single skin four inches
broad, is often sold for ten or fifteen pounds -- the fur surpassing all other
in having no grain; whatever way rubbed, is equally smooth and unresisting,
iii. 373 -- a certain number of these furnished every year by condemned exiles,
and Russian soldiers, sent into Siberia to kill the animal, iii. 375 -- of the
ondatra also very valuable, iv. 80 -- of the mole, Agricola saw the finest and
most beautiful hats that could be imagined, made of their skins, iv. 98 -- of
the hedgehog, converted to no use, except to muzzle calves, from sucking, iv.
105 -- of the elephant, not covered with hair -- that part covering the head
resembles the bark of an old tree more than the skin of an animal, iv. 265 --
of the rhinoceros, so thick as to turn the edge of a scymetar, and resist a
musquet-ball, iv. 286 -- is naked, rough, knotty, and lying upon the body in
folds, after a very peculiar manner, iv. 285 -- of the ostrich, what use the
Arabians make of it, v. 61 -- of the great Greenland whale, marbled white and
yellow, vi. 194 -- of the civet, so strongly scented, a person shut up with one
in a close room cannot support the perfume, iii. 392, 393 Skink, an animal
called one of the pole-cats of America, iii. 380 -- the author thinks it
Catesby's Virginia pole-cat -- its description, iii. 381 Skull-fish, name of
the whale above two years old, vi. 200 Slatberg, in Ireland (in the lands of)
there stood a declivity, and the earth of it was found sliding down the hill
upon the subjacent plain, i. 160 Sleep, with some lower animals, takes up the
greatest part of their lives -- man the only creature requiring sleep from
double motives, for the refreshment of the mental, and of the bodily frame, ii.
134 -- want of it produces madness, ii. 135 -- procured to man with more
difficulty than to other animals -- in what manner sleep fetters us for hours
together, according to Rohault, ii. 136, 137 -- care required to regulate its
quantity, and why, ii. 137, 138 -- bodily labor demands a less quantity of it
than mental -- the famous Philip Barrettier slept twelve hours in the
twenty-four, ii. 138 -- sleep to some an agreeable period of existence --
questions treated in the schools to this purpose, ii. 139 -- numberless
instances of persons who, asleep, performed many ordinary duties of their
calling; and, with ridiculous industry, completed by night, what they failed
doing by day -- remarkable instance related in the German Ephemerides, ii. 140,
141 -- ridiculous history of Arlotto, a friar, with a narrative of the actions
of his life, when asleep, ii. 142, 143 Sloth, two different kinds of that
animal, the air and the unan, iv. 343 -- described, 344 -- both seem the
meanest and most ill-formed of all animals that chew the cud -- their food --
formed by nature to climb -- they get up a tree with pain, but utterly unable
to descend -- drop from the branches to the ground, iv. 345 -- move with
imperceptible slowness, baiting by the way, iv. 346 -- strip a tree of its
verdure in less than a fortnight, afterward devour the bark, and in a short
time kill what might prove their support, iv. 345 -- every step taken, sends
forth a plaintive melancholy cry, which, from some resemblance to the human
voice, excites a displeasing pity, iv. 346 -- like birds, have but one vent for
propagation, excrement, and urine, iv. 347 -- they continue to live some time
after their nobler parts are wounded, or taken away -- their note, according to
Kircher, an ascending and descending hexachord, uttered only by night -- their
look piteous, to move compassion; accompanied with tears, that dissuade
injuring so wretched a being -- one fastened by its feet to a pole, suspended
across two beams, remained forty days without meat, drink, or sleep, iv. 347,
-- an amazing instance of strength in the feet instanced, iv. 348 Slot, term
for the print of the hoof of the stag, iii. 113 -- to draw on the slot, a
phrase among hunters, iii. 114. Slow, name given by some to the blind-worm,
vii. 222 Smell, no substance now known in the world has a stronger, and more
permanent smell than musk, iii. 89 -- strong offensive smell of foxes often the
cause of their death, iii. 324 -- of the weasel-kind, kept tame about the
houses of the planters in America, not very offensive, iii. 383 -- of the
genett, not endured by mice and rats, iii. 388 -- the musky not properly a
characteristic mark of any kind of animal, iii. 32 Smelling, the sense in which
man is most inferior to other animals -- it never offends them -- stronger in
nations abstaining from animal food, than in Europeans, ii. 179 -- bramins of
India have a power of smelling, equal to what is in other creatures, -- can
smell water they drink, to us quite inodorous -- negroes of the Antilles by
smell distinguish the footsteps of a Frenchman from those of a negroe -- in a
state of nature useful, not in our situation -- gives often false intelligence,
ii. 180 -- natives of different countries, or different natives of the same,
differ widely in that sense -- instances of it, ii. 181 -- mixtures of bodies
void of odor produce powerful smells -- mixtures of bodies separately
disagreeable, give pleasant aromatic smells -- a slight cold blunts all
smelling -- incurable aversions to smells formerly agreeable, retained from
disorders -- smallest changes in man make great alterations in this sense --
antipathies to animals, whose presence is perceived by the smell, ii. 282 --
delicacy of smelling in birds instanced in ducks, v. 11 Savours, mechanical
manner of accounting for difference of favors, ii. 183 Smile, Fielding
asserts, a person with a steady glavering smile, never failed to prove himself
a rogue, ii. 94 Snail, shell of the garden-snail, in what manner formed, vii.
3, et seq. Sea-snail, a cartilaginous fish, described, vi. 288 Garden-snail, is
surprisingly fitted for the life it is to live -- organs of life, it possesses
in common with animals, vii. 19 -- and what peculiar to itself, vii. 20 --
every snail at once male and female; and while it impregnates another, is
impregnated in turn, vii. 21 -- coupling these animals -- hide their eggs in
great numbers in the earth, with great solicitude and industry, vii. 22 -- the
growth of them, vii. 23 -- possessed of the power of mending the shell; and
come to full growth, they cannot make a new one -- Swammerdam's experiment to
this purpose, vii. 24 -- their food, vii. 26 -- salt destroys them, so does
soot -- a tortoise in a garden banishes them most effectually, vii. 25 --
continue in a torpid state during the severity of winter -- so great their
multiplication in some years, that gardeners imagine they burst from the earth
-- wet seasons favorable to their production, vii. 26 -- sea snail, fresh
water snail, and land snail, vii. 27 -- common garden snail compared with the
fresh water snail, and sea snail, vii. 28 -- fresh water snails vivaporous --
bring forth young alive, with shells upon their backs -- experiment made by
Swammerdam to this purpose -- at all times of the year, fresh water snails
opened, are pregnant with eggs, or with living snails, or with both together,
vii. 29, 30 -- sea snails found viviparous, others lay eggs, vii. 30 -- manner
in which the sea snails impregnate each other -- different orifices or verges
of snails -- the difference between land and sea snails, vii. 31 -- of the
trochus kind, have no mouth -- their trunk -- are among snails, as the tiger,
the eagle, or the shark, among beasts, birds, and fishes, vii. 33 -- food of
all sea snails lies at the bottom -- of sea snails, that most frequently
swimming upon the surface, whose shell is thinnest, and most easily pierced, is
the nautilus, vii. 35 -- its description, vii. 36 -- nothing seemingly more
impossible, yet is more certain, than the nautilus sometimes quitting its
shell, and returning to it again -- peculiarity by which the nautilus is most
distinguished, vii. 37 Snake, continues for several months together subsisting
upon a single meal, ii. 125 -- snakes destroy mice, iv. 73 -- the only animal
in the forest adventuring to oppose the monkey -- larger snakes often winding
up the trees where they reside, and happening to surprise them sleeping,
swallow them whole, before they have time to make defense, iv. 220. See
Serpents. Black snake, its description and food -- are oviparous, vii. 220, 221
Snipe, a water-bird of passage -- its description, vi. 23 to 28 Snow,
inhabitants of places where fields are continually white with snow, generally
become blind before the usual course of nature, i. 15 -- its melting produces a
constant breeze, i. 347 Snow-slips, dreaded by travelers -- a family in
Germany lived for a fortnight beneath one of there snow-slips, i. 161 Sobbing,
is a sigh still more invigorated, ii. 92 Soland goose, belongs to the northern
islands; in greatest number on the Bass island, and subsists entirely upon
fish, vi. 71 to 75. See Bass and Gannet. Soldier-crab, like a lobster, without
a shell -- a native of the West India islands -- description, and descent from
the mountains, vi. 376 to 379 Solfatara, a valley near Naples, described --
exhibits the appearance of an earthquake in miniature, i 123 Sonorous bodies;
those who make the tone of such bodies to depend upon the number only, and not
the force of its vibrations, mistake an effect for a cause, ii. 164 Soot, as
well as salt, will destroy snails, vii. 25 Sore, name the hunters give the buck
the fourth year, iii. 128 Sorel, the hunters name for the buck the third year,
iii. 128 Sorrel, wood sorrel boiled up with milk, by the Laplanders kept in
casks underground, to be eaten in winter, iii. 166 Sound conveyed by air, is
lost in vacuo, i. 334. -- sounding bodies of two kinds; unelastic returning a
single sound, and elastic rendering a succession of sounds -- undulations in
elastic bodies, taken by the ear as one continued sound, while, in reality,
they make many, ii. 163 -- those whose differences can most easily be compared,
are most agreeable, ii. 166 -- those musical most pleasing, which are most
unexpected, ii. 167 -- laws of the reflection of sound not so well understood
as those of light, ii. 171 -- persons of a bad ear often deceived as to the side
whence sound comes, ii. 173 -- trumpets made to increase sounds, ii. 174
Source, rivers have their source in mountains, or elevated lakes, i. 200
Southminster marshes so overrun with an army of mice, that the grass was eat
up to the roots, v. 148 Spalanzani, his experiments concerning the power of
reproduction in animals, viii. 172 Spaniards, the only people of Europe
acquainted with the value of the ass, ii. 385 Spaniels, land and water, the
offspring of the beagle, transported into Spain or Barbary, so altered, and
converted there, iii. 284 -- a dog of the generous kind, iii. 286 -- the land
spaniel, iii. 288 -- the water spaniel, iii. 289 Spanish flies described; their
use in medicine, and as blisters, viii. 41 to 43. See Cantharis. Sparrows,
house sparrow, v. 315 -- various birds of the sparrow kind -- their food, v.
314, 315 -- songsters of this class, v. 316, 317 -- their migrations, v. 317,
318 -- a male and its mate that have young, destroy above three thousand
caterpillars in a week, viii. 44. Sparrow hawk, one of the baser race of hawks,
v. 119 -- taught to fly at game, but little obtained from its efforts -- lately
asserted, upon respectable authority, the boldest of all for the pleasure of
the chase, v. 131 Sparus, the sea-bream, its description, vi. 308 Spawn,
different seasons for fish to deposit their spawn, vi. 180 -- always deposited
in particular places, where the sunbeams may reach them, vi. 336 Spawning,
peculiar preparation of the lamprey for spawning, vi. 272 Spears (burning) a
peculiar kind of aurora borealis, i. 390 Spears, the horns of the stag the
third year, iii. 113 Spermaceti, the whole oil of the cachalot easily converted
into that concrete, vi. 218, 220 -- efficacy of spermaceti in medicine very
small -- candles now made much of it are substituted for wax, and sold cheaper,
vi. 220 Spermaceti whale, the cachelot, described, vi. 217 Spiders, in South
America and Africa, as large as sparrows, ii. 6 -- the spider for several
months together, subsists upon a single meal, ii. 125 -- chief of our native
spiders -- not venomous, vii. 249 -- their description and habitudes -- the
Martinico spider's body as large as a hen's egg, vii. 250 -- manner of making
their webs, vii. 254, 257 -- Lister has distinguished the sexes of this animal
-- their coupling -- their number of eggs, vii. 260 -- their bag to deposit
their eggs, vii. 261 -- their parental care, enemies to each other --
experiment made by Mr. Reaumur to turn their labors to the advantage of man --
gloves made from their webs -- found it impracticable to rear them, vii. 262,
263 Water-Spiders inhabit the bottom, yet never wet, but enclosed in a bubble
of air, surrounding them on all sides, vii. 264 Spinal marrow and the brain,
the first parts seen begun in the embryo, ii. 146 Spinous class of fishes
already extended to four hundred sorts, vi. 299 -- Gouan's system and
arrangement of the various sorts of spinous fishes, vi. 305 -- their general
leading marks and difference from others, vi. 317 -- of those which live in the
ocean, the dorado the most voracious, vi. 340 Spirits of wine flame with a
candle, not with a spark, i. 83 Spitzbergen, belief that bodies never corrupt
there, nor suffer any apparent alteration, though buried for thirty years, ii.
264 Sponges, opinion of count Marsigli about them -- that of Rumph and Jussieu
set in a clearer light by Mr. Ellis, viii. 193, 194 Spoonbill, descriptions of
the European and American spoonbill, vi. 7 -- its manner of life, vi. 8 Sports,
remarkable, on horseback, among the grandees of Guinea, ii. 363, 364 -- one
peculiar to the Italians, in which horses without riders run against each
other, ii. 354 -- of wild asses exhibited in Persia, ii. 377, 378 -- of the
bird-catchers, counterfeiting the cry of the owl, v. 144 -- cock-fighting in
China, India, the Philippine islands, and all over the East, the sport of kings
and princes, v. 163 -- of hunting the turkey in Canada, v. 179 Spouts of water
at sea common in the tropical seas, and sometimes in our own -- description of
one in the Mediterranean by Tournefort -- solutions offered for this
phoenomenon, i. 390 to 393 -- broken by guns firing bars of iron at them, which
striking them, the water falls from them with a dreadful noise, and no farther
mischief -- those called typhons, sometimes seen at land, differs from those at
sea described by mariners -- description of that observed at Hatfield in
Yorkshire, in 1687, i. 394, 395 -- land-spouts sometimes drop in a column of
water at once upon the earth, and produce an inundation -- they appear in the
calmest weather at sea -- facts still wanting to form a rational theory of
them, i. 396 Spout-holes, in the cetaceous tribe, described, vi. 186 Springs,
of water, experience alone can determine the useful or noxious qualities of
every spring, i. 171 -- one mentioned by Derham, which he never perceived to be
diminished in the greatest drought, when all ponds in the country were dry for
several months, i. 199 Squash, a stinkard, of the weasel-kind, called a polecat
of America, iii. 380 -- its description, iii. 381 -- is said to eat only the
brains of poultry -- its scent strong enough to reach half a mile round, near
hand almost stifling -- a drop of the foetid discharge falling into the eye,
might blind it for ever -- dogs abate their ardour, when they meet the foetid
discharge, turn, and leave the squash master of the field, never to be led on
again, iii. 384 -- cows and oxen strongly affected by the stench -- and
provisions spoilt by it -- with planters and native Americans, kept tame about
their houses; seldom emitting disagreeable scents, except when injured or
frighted -- natives eat the flesh, taking care to clear it of the offensive
glands, iii. 385 Squinting, many instances of squinting communicated by a
father to his offspring, ii. 238 Squirrel, a ruminating animal, iii. 5 --
classed as such by Pierius, iv. 3 -- the tails are extremely long, beautiful
and bushy, and serve them for several purposes, iv. 24, 25 -- particularly in
vast leaps of one hundred yards taken from tree to tree, iv. 25, 35 -- when the
animal eats or dresses itself, it sits erect, like the hare or rabbit, making
use of its fore feet as hands, iv. 25 -- the kind has as many varieties as any
wild animal; enumeration of some, iv. 25 to 27 -- its way of moving is by
bounds, iv. 32 -- when tamed, is apt to break away at every opportunity, iv. 37
-- few animals so tender, or so unfit for a change of abode, iv. 27 -- some
live on the tops of trees, others feed on vegetables below, where also they
take shelter in storms -- description of its qualities, food, and mansion --
the nest formed among large branches, where they fork off into small, iv. 28,
29 -- the martin destroys the squirel, then takes possession of its mansion,
iv. 30 Squirrels are in heat early in the spring, very diverting to see the
female then feigning an escape from the pursuit of two or three males -- nature
particular in the formation of these animals for propagation -- time of
gestation -- keeps in the midst of tallest trees, and shuns the habitation of
men -- the tree but touched at bottom, they quit the nest, and fly to another
tree, thus traveling with ease, along the tops of the forest, until quite out
of danger, iv. 31 -- in Lapland vast numbers remove from one part to another,
iv. 32 -- method of crossing broad rivers, or extensive lakes, iv. 33 -- they
have a sharp piercing note; and another, more like the purring of the cat when
pleased, iv. 32 -- the Laplanders eat their flesh, iv. 34 -- description of the
common sort, and of the gray Virginian kind, iv. 25 -- the Barbary; Siberian
white; Carolina black; Brasilian, iv. 26 -- little ground Carolina, and
New-Spain squirrel, iv. 27 -- Flying squirrel more common in America than
Europe -- its food and mansion, iv. 36 Stag, first in rank among quadrupeds,
its elegant form described -- no obvious difference between the internal
structure of the stag and the bull, but to a nice observer, iii. 94 --
ruminates not so easily as the cow or sheep, reason why, iii. 106 -- manner of
knowing its age -- differs in size and horns from a fallow-deer, iii. 95 --
increase in beauty and stature in proportion to goodness of pasture, enjoyed in
security, iii, 104 -- seldom drinks in winter, and less in spring, iii. 106 --
different colors of stags, iii. 104, 105 -- how watchfully he examines an
enemy's approach -- delighted with the sound of the shepherd's pipe -- of
animals native of this climate, none such a beautiful eye as the stag, iii. 105
-- beauty and size of horns mark strength and vigor, iii. 98 -- time and
manner of shedding them, iii. 95, 96, 99, 100 -- severe cold retards the
shedding -- horns increase in thickness and height from the second year of age
to the eighth, iii. 100 -- shedding his horns, hides himself in solitudes and
thickets, and ventures out to pasture only by night, iii. 96, 101 -- grow
differently in stags from sheep or cows, iii. 97 -- horns found to partake of
the nature of the soil, iv. 100 -- a mistake that horns take color of the sap
of the tree against which they are rubbed, iii. 101 -- stag, castrated when its
horns are off, they never grow again; the same operation performed when they
are on, they never fall off -- one testicle only tied up, he loses the horn of
the opposite side -- Mr. Buffon thinks the growth of the horns retarded by
retrenching the food, iii. 98 -- horns resembled to a vegetable substance,
grafted upon the head of the stag, iii, 99 -- time of feeling impressions of
the rut, or desire of copulation, iii. 101 -- effects, the rut causes, iii. 102
-- stag lives about, forty years, iii. 103 -- voice in the time of rut terrible
-- and then keeps dogs off intrepidly -- a stag and tiger enclosed in the same
area, the stag's defense so bold, the tiger was obliged to fly, iii. 106 -- the
stag in rut ventures out to sea from one island to another, and swims best when
fattest, iii. 107 -- the hind, or female, uses all her arts to conceal her
young from him, the most dangerous of her pursuers, iii. 108 -- men of every
age and nation made the stag chase a favorite pursuit, iii. 108, 109 -- stags
remaining wild in England, called red-deer, found on the moors bordering
Cornwall and Devonshire, iii. 111, 112 -- manner of hunting stag and buck in
England, iii. 112, 116 -- different names given them, according to their ages,
iii. 113 -- terms used by hunters pursuing the stag, iii. 113, 114 -- the
manner of knowing the track of a stag -- and that of an hind -- he changes his
manner of feeding every month; in what manner, iii. 115 -- swims, against the
stream, iii. 119 -- the ancient manner of pursuing him -- that of hunting him,
iii 119, 120 -- and in China, iii. 121, 122 -- stag of Corsica -- a kind called
by the ancients tragelaphus -- Germans call it bran-deer, or brown-deer, iii.
122 -- a beautiful stag, thought a native of Sardinia, though perhaps of
Africa, or the East Indies -- its description -- stag royal, in Mexico, iii.
123, 124 -- of Canada, brought into the state of domestic tameness as our
sheep, goats, and black cattle, iii. 124 Staggard, name of the stag the fourth
year, iii. 113 Stallions, law prohibiting exportation of stallions and mares;
and another similar, obtained as early as the times of Athelstan, ii. 369
Stanislaus, the exiled king of Poland, had a dwarf at his court in Luneville --
described, ii. 255 Stare, bird classed with the thrush, distinction from the
rest of its tribe -- its residence -- its eggs -- it is easily taught to speak
-- its food, v. 323 Star-fish, general description of the tribe -- substance of
their bodies almost as soft as water, no way injured by swallowing shells
almost of a stony hardness, viii. 174 -- float upon the surface of the sea, and
in the dark send forth a shining light resembling that of phosphorus -- are
also called seanettles -- the passage for devouring food, serves to eject
excrements -- taken and put into spirits of wine, continue many years entire,
but left to influence of air, in four and twenty hours melted down into a
limpid offensive water, viii. 175 -- cut in pieces, every part survives the
operation, becoming a perfect animal, endued with its natural rapacity, viii.
176 Starling, slender-billed bird of the sparrow-kind, living upon insects, v.
314 -- often lays eggs in holes deserted by the wood-pecker, v. 253 -- time of
migration, v. 32 Stars, fixed, supposed by philosophers suns resembling that
which enlivens our system, i. 6 Stars, falling, meteors, or unctuous vapors
raised from the earth, kindled and supported in the air, until they fall back
extinguished, i. 390 Statues of antiquity, first copied after human form, now
become models of it, ii. 106 Stature, middle in men, from five feet five to
five feet eight inches, ii. 108 -- cause of different statures, ii. 237 --
ordinary of men, Mr. Derham observes, probably the same now as at the beginning
-- many corroborating proofs of this, ii. 264 Stellaris, name given by the
Latins to the bittern, vi. 5 Steno, his opinion about the formation of the
incipient animal, ii. 17 Stephen, in this king's time the number of horses in
London amounted to twenty thousand, ii. 370 Stigmata, holes through which
caterpillars breathe, viii. 13 -- famous experiment of Malpighi to verify this,
viii. 14 Stickleback, the gasterosteus of the prickly-finned thoracic sort,
description of this fish, vi. 309 -- this fish appears in quantities every
seventh or eighth year in the river Welland, near Spalding; a man, employed by
a farmer to take them, for manuring his grounds, got, for a considerable time,
four shillings a day, selling them at a halfpenny a bushel, vi. 334 Stilicon,
his two daughters betrothed, one after the other, to the emperor Honorius,
buried with much finery, found eleven hundred years after, in good
preservation, excepting the pearls, vii. 57 Stinkards, name given by our
sailors to one or two animals of the weasel kind, chiefly found in America,
iii. 380 -- and by the savages of Canada to the musk-rat, iv. 80 Stint, smaller
and shorter billed water bird of the crane kind, vi. 23 Stoat, the ermine, its
description, iii. 353 Stomach, nature has contracted the stomachs of animals of
the forest, suitable to their precarious way of living, ii. 124 -- proportioned
to the quality of the animal's food, or the ease of obtaining it -- those who
chew the cud have four stomachs, ii. 317, and iii. 3 -- yet several of those
have but two in Africa, ii. 317 -- names of the four stomachs, iii. 3, 4 --
stomach of carnivorous animals small, iii. 2 -- those of ruminating strong and
muscular, iii. 5 -- of insects composed of muscular fibers, iii. 6 -- the camel
has a fifth stomach, as a reservoir of water for occasional use, iv. 307 --
birds have, properly, but one stomach, yet this is different in different
kinds, v. 14, 15 -- that of the cuckoo enormous, reaches from the breast bone
to the vent, v. 266 Stork, a ruminating bird, iii. 5 -- true difference between
it and the crane, v. 382 -- are birds of passage -- returning into Europe in
March -- places for their nests -- number of eggs -- are a month in hatching;
and their young excluded, they are particularly solicitous for their safety --
their food in a great measure frogs and serpents, v. 383 -- the Dutch attentive
to the preservation of the stork in their republic, the bird protected by the
laws, and the prejudices of the people -- countries where found -- ancient
Egyptians regard for this bird carried to adoration -- the ancient ibis
supposed the same which at present bears the same name; a bird of the stork
kind, about the size of a curlew, v. 384 Storms, foretold by the barometer, i.
352 -- above their region, all is calm and serene, i. 353 -- rise to the tops
of the highest mountains -- confirmed by those who have been on the Andes, and
by the deep snows that crown them, i. 153, 154 -- with powerful effects, do not
show great speed, i. 356 -- one most dreadful in Hertfordshire, in 1697 --
description of it, i. 375 -- do not terrify goats, iii. 53 Stones, shower of
stones and other matters raised by storms in one country, carried to another,
fall suddenly as showers of rain, i. 390 Stone of the shammoy, generally about
the size of a walnut, and blackish -- formerly in request for the same virtues
with oriental bezoar, iii. 69 Stone-chatter, slender-billed bird of the
sparrow-kind, v. 314 -- migrates, iii. 318 Stove, its warmth expeditious for
hatching, and efficacious in bringing the animal in the egg to perfection, ii.
27 Strabism, an inequality of sight, and particular cast of the eye; whence it
proceeds, ii. 157 Stream of rivers, more rapid in proportion as its channel is
diminished, and why, i. 205 -- the surface swifter than the bottom, and why --
islands, turnings, and other obstacles retard the course but inconsiderably,
and why, i. 206 Strength, a just way of estimating human strength, by
perseverance and agility of motions, ii. 114 -- not hereditary, ii. 116
prodigies of it in Maximin the emperor described -- instance of it in Milo, and
also in Athanatus, ii. 118 -- estimation of strength in animals by the bulk of
their muscles very fallacious; thin and raw-boned men being generally stronger
and powerful than those seemingly more muscular -- women much inferior in
strength to men, ii. 120 -- of man less valuable since the invention of
gunpowder, of new machines, and the application of the power of animals to the
purposes of life, ii. 119 -- of the inhabitants round the poles is amazing, ii.
218 -- the comparative strength of a horse, measured, not by what he can carry,
but by what he can draw, ii. 114 Strepsicheros, a third variety of sheep with
strait horns, a native of the islands of the Archipelago, iii. 48 Stromateus, a
soft-finned apodal fish, described, vi. 311 Strong, human body, for its size,
stronger than that of other animals -- comparing the strength of a lion with
that of a man, to be remembered the claws of this animal give a false idea of
its power; and lead to ascribe to its force what is only the effects of its
offensive arms, ii. 111 Struthophagi, some nations so called from their
fondness for the flesh of the ostrich, v. 59 -- their method of taking it, v.
61 Stuffs made of hair of animals about Angora, iii. 58 -- half composed of
silk, forbid to be worn at Rome, as a luxurious refinement, viii. 49 Stunts,
name given to whales at the age of two years, vi. 200 Sturgeon, a cartilaginous
fish, of a considerable size, yet flies terrified from the smallest fishes --
its description -- three kinds of it, vi. 275 -- countries of Europe this fish
visits at different seasons -- annually ascends the largest rivers to spawn,
and propagates in vast numbers -- enjoying the vicissitude of fresh and salt
water, then grows to an enormous size, almost to rival the whale, vi. 276 --
the largest caught in Great Britain taken in the Eske, where frequently found
weighing four hundred and fifty pounds, vi. 277 -- places where caught in
numbers, vi. 276, 277 -- never by a bait, always in nets, vi. 277 -- their food
-- whence the German proverb, he is as moderate as a sturgeon, vi. 278 -- live
in society among themselves; and Gesner has seen them shoal together at the
notes of a trumpet -- usual time of coming up rivers to spawn -- at Pillau the
shores formed into districts, and allotted to companies of fishermen, and
rented some for three hundred pounds a year -- nets in which caught -- in the
water it is one of the strongest fishes, and often breaks the nets that enclose
it, but its head once raised above water, its activity ceases, vi. 279 -- has
broke fishermen's legs with a blow of its tail -- two methods of preparing it,
vi. 280 -- that from America not so good as from the north of Europe -- caviar
made with the roe of all kinds of sturgeon -- manner of making it, vi. 281, 282
Sturmey, the captain who descended into Penparkhole, where remaining five
hours, cost him his life, i. 66 Sucking fish, the remora, sticks to the shark
-- also called the shark's pilot, and why, vi. 246 Sucking-fish, the echeneis,
a soft finned thoracic fish, its description, vi, 312 Suction, from whence that
amazing power in the lamprey arises, vi. 270 Sugar, the white sort in the
tropical climates sometimes full of maggots, i. 314 Sulphur, with iron filings
kneaded together into a paste, with water when heating, produces a flame, i. 76
Sun, its warmth efficacious in bringing the animal in the egg to perfection,
ii. 27 -- not easy to conceive how it whitens wax and linen, and darkens the
human complexion, ii. 235 -- mock-suns and other meteors seen in the Alps, i.
145 -- in the polar regions, i. 377 -- reflected upon opposite clouds, appear
like three or four real suns in the firmament -- real sun always readily known
by superior brightness -- the rainbow also different in those countries, i. 388
Sun fish, an anomalous cartilaginous fish, like a bulky head, its description,
vi. 285 Surf of the sea, name the mariners give the rising waves breaking
against the shore, i. 273 Surinam rat; the phalanger, a small monkey,
described, iv. 248 Surinam toad, the pipali, a hideous toad, its description,
vii. 108 Surmalot, with Mr. Buffon, the great rat, a hateful rapacious
creature, described, iv. 65 Surmulet, the mullus, a spinous fish, its
description, vi. 308 Swallows, time of their migrations -- departure of some,
and retreat of others into old walls, from the inclemencies of winter, wrap the
migrations of birds in great obscurity, v. 37 -- experiment of Mr. Buffon to
this purpose, v. 38 -- with us birds of passage; breed in Upper Egypt and the
land of Java, and never disappear, v. 318 -- house swallow, v. 346 --
characteristics of the swallow-tribe, v. 347 their food -- have the greatest
swiftness and agility, v. 348 -- at the end of September they depart; some
feeble wretched families, compelled to stay, perish the first cold weather, v.
351 -- those migrating first seen in Africa in the beginning of October, having
performed their journey in seven days -- sometimes seen, interrupted by
contrary winds, wavering in their course at sea, and lighting upon the Chips in
their passage -- a doubt whether all swallows thus migrate, or some other of
this species externally alike, and internally different, be differently
affected by the approach of winter, v. 352 -- observations made to this purpose
by Reaumur, Frisch, and Klein, v. 353 -- indicate approaching change of weather
-- their nests, and those they build on the coasts of China and Coromandel, v.
349 -- Chinese pluck them from rocks, and send great numbers into the East
Indies for sale -- gluttons esteem them great delicacies dissolved in chicken
or mutton broth -- the number of their eggs, v. 350 Swallows of Ternate, or
God's birds, the bird of paradise, described, v. 257 to 260 Swammerdam, lent
attention to testaceous animals, almost exceeding credibility; has excelled the
insects he dissected, in patience, industry, and perseverance, vii. 17 Swan, a
stately web-footed water fowl; though an indifferent figure upon land, is
beautiful in the water, vi. 113 -- doubt whether the tame kind be in a state of
nature -- none found in Europe -- the wild swan, though strongly resembling it
in color and form, yet another bird -- differences between wild and tame
swans, vi. 114 -- considered a high delicacy among the ancients, vi. 111 -- the
tame most silent, the wild has a loud and disagreeable note -- from thence
called the hooper, vi. 115 -- accounts sufficient to suspend an opinion of its
musical abilities, vi. 115 to 118 -- their food, nest, and number of eggs, vi.
118 -- a blow with the pinion breaks a man's leg or arm -- two months hatching,
and a year growing to proper size -- longest in the shell of any bird -- said
to live three hundred years -- by an act of Edward IV. the son of the king was
allowed to keep a swan, and no others, unless possessed of five marks a year,
vi. 119 -- punishment for taking their eggs, was imprisonment for a year and a
day, and fine at the king's will -- places which abound with them, vi. 120
Swarms of a bee-hive, several swarms in the year, the first always the best and
most numerous, viii. 86 Sweden, asses a sort of rarity in Sweden, ii. 385
Sweetmeats, in tropical climates, exposed by day in the sun, to prevent their
putrefying by the night air, i. 314 Swift, a bird of the swallow kind; peculiar
position of the toes, v. 346, 347 Swiftness of savages, many surprising stories
about it, ii. 115 -- of the zebra, a proverb among the Spaniards and
Portuguese, ii. 396 Switzerland, the peasants kill a cow for their own table,
salt and hang it up, to preserve as a delicacy the year round, iii. 9
Sword-fish, the xiphias, its description, vi. 305 -- its terrible encounters
with the whale described, vi. 203 Syagushes, carnivorous animals, like the
jackall and wolf; hunt in packs, and encourage each other by their cries, ii.
322 Symmetry, and proportion of the human body, ii. 79 Sympathetic, affection
of yawning, ii. 91 -- a ridiculous instance of it practiced upon professor
M'Laurin at Edinburgh, ii. 92 Synovia, a lubricating liquor in the joints, so
called by anatomists, ii. 109 Syria, noted country for long soft hair of the
animals bred in it, iii. 212 -- most of its cities destroyed in 1182 by an
earthquake, i. 111 Syrian-rabbit, an instance of the length of its hair, iv. 23
System, in what manner the harmony of our planetary system is preserved, i. 4
-- very useful in natural history, ii. 290 -- books containing them, useful to
be consulted, but unnecessary to be read, ii. 292 -- that of Linnaeus deserves
the preference, ii. 293 -- faults of systematic writers in natural history, ii.
252 -- what has given birth to the variety of systems in natural history, ii.
300 -- of Mr. Gouan concerning spinous classes of fishes, vi. 305 -- use of it,
vi. 315
T.
Tabbies, streaked cats, to which the civet's color is compared, iii. 390
Tajacu, the peccary, an animal of the hog kind, peculiar for a lump upon its
back, with glands discharging a musky substance, iii. 183 Tails of sheep a foot
broad, and weighing from twenty to thirty pounds, sometimes supported by a
board upon wheels, iii, 47 Tail, use made of it by the whale, vi. 195 -- is
about twenty-four feet broad, vi. 194 Talapoin, eighth division of monkies of
the ancient continent -- its description, iv. 334 Talons, in what manner
produced in animals, ii. 101 Tamaim, a monkey of the second sort of the sagoin
kind -- description, iv. 237 Tamandua, an ant-bear, larger and smaller, live
upon ants -- their description, iv. 338 Tamis-bird, one of the names of the
guinea-hen, described, v. 192, 193 Tanais, the Don, a principal river of
Europe, parting it from Asia, i. 209 -- affords great numbers of sturgeon, vi.
277 Tanrec, of the hedgehog kind, different enough to constitute another
species, iv. 105 -- covered with prickles, though mixed with hair -- does not
defend itself by rolling up in a ball -- only found in the East Indies --
sleeps several months, and loves to be near water, iv. 106 -- in the torpid
state, its hair falls off -- Indians consider its flesh a delicacy, iv. 107
Tapeti, the Brasilian rabbit, in shape like the English -- has no tail -- does
nor burrow -- lives at large, like the hare -- is twice the size of a
dor-mouse, iv. 54 Tapir, the largest animal of America, no way comparable in
size to the elephant of Africa, ii. 332 -- considered as the hippopotamos of
the new continent -- its description -- resides in the water, iv. 331 -- its
food -- its flesh thought a delicacy, iv. 332 Tar, used by the Laplanders for
all disorders of the reindeer, iii. 169 Tarantula, the bite of this animal,
and its cure by music, all a deception -- instance of it, ii. 171 -- native of
Apulia in Italy -- description -- its bite not attended with dangerous symptoms
-- fable of its virulence, vii. 265 Tarcel, name falconers give the male bird
of prey; and why, v. 84 Tariguagua, ruggedness of road from it up to the Andes,
is not easily described, i. 149 Tarnassar, great bird in the East Indies, no
other than the condor, v. 105 Tarrier, first division of dogs of the generous
kind, used for hunting, iii. 286 Tarsier, a monkey, last of the class of the
oppossum kinds -- its description -- why so called, iv. 248 Tartars, their
religion consists in part by managing their whiskers -- they waged a bloody war
with the Persians as infidels, not giving their whiskers the orthodox cut, ii.
96 -- the Ostiac, a race traveled down from the North, and originally sprung
from minute savages, ii. 219 -- Samoeid, first distinct race of men round the
pole, described, ii. 213, 214 Tartar horses serviceable in war -- how broke --
particulars concerning them, ii. 364, 365 Tartary, in general, comprehends
great part of Asia -- description of natives and manners, ii. 219, 220 Taste,
in all substances on mountain tops, and valley bottoms, i. 335 -- to determine
somewhat upon the nature of tastes, bodies to be tasted must be moistened, or
dissolved by saliva, to produce a sensation; the tongue and body to be tasted,
being dry, no taste ensues -- tastes rendered agreeable by habit -- relish of
tastes stronger in children than in persons advanced in life, ii. 183 --
highest epicure has the most depraved taste, ii. 184 Tatou, or armadilla, a
quadruped of the new continent, covered with shells, ii. 124. See Armadilla.
Tatu-apara, first of the kinds of armadilla -- the second, the tatou of Ray, or
the encoubert of Mr. Buffon -- the third, the tatuette -- their diversities
described, iv. 132, 133 Teal, smallest bird of the duck-kind, distinguished,
vi. 130 Teats, great variety of them in animals -- their form, and how placed,
ii. 103 Teeth in cows, eight cutting teeth in the lower jaw -- manner of
renewing them, iii. 11 Tegg, what the hunters call the do the second year,
iii. 128 Tejuguacu, tockay, and cordyle, all of the lizard kind, gradually
less, fill up the chasm between the crocodile and the African iguana, vii. 149
Tempests, loudest formed by united contributions of minerals, vegetables, and
animals, increasing the streams of air fleeting round the globe, i. 338 --
frequent under the tropics, and a space beyond them, i. 356 -- tempests of
sand, deserts raised in one country, and deposited on another, i. 357 -- in
Arabia and Africa described, i. 363 Teneriffe (the peak of) computed a mile and
a half perpendicular from the surface of the sea, i. 153 Teneriffe (island of),
the art of embalming preserved among the ancient inhabitants, when conquered by
the Spaniards, ii. 272 Tendrac, an animal less than a mole, different from the
hedgehog, and a different species, iv. 105 -- description -- grunt like hogs,
and love to be near water -- they multiply in numbers -- sleep several months,
iv. 106 -- its flesh a great delicacy with the Indians, iv. 107 Ternate, a
Molucca island, its swallow taken for the bird of Paradise, v. 260 Testaceous
substances in variety on the tops of mountains, and in the heart of marble, i.
17 Testaceous animals -- Swammerdam lent an attention to those animals
exceeding credibility, vii. 17 Thales the philosopher, held all things made of
water, i. 166 Thames water, and that of the Indus, most light and wholesome, i.
170 Theories of the earth, those of the most celebrated authors, i. 22 Theory
of evaporations for the formation of clouds, i. 370 -- other theories upon that
subject, i. 368 -- theory of sympathy, of father Mallebranche, beautiful upon
monstrous productions, ii. 246 Therasia, an island appeared unexpectedly to
mariners on other pursuits, i. 125 Thermometer, measures heat and cold by a
fixed standard -- description, i. 177 -- shows the heat of blood; in man, and
most animals, about thirty degrees above congelation -- in the marmotte, and
other torpid creatures, not above ten; and in the body of a living dormouse,
never beyond the usual pitch in air, sometimes a degree below it, iv. 45
Thessaly, the horses there reputed excellent for war, ii. 365 Theutys, a
prickly-finned abdominal fish -- description of it, vi. 310 Thibet, the musk
from thence reckoned the best -- sells at fourteen shillings the ounce, iii. 93
-- the peacock there the most beautiful of the feathered creation, v. 176
Thoracic fish, that which has the ventral fins directly under the pectoral
fins, vi. 303 Thoulouse, bodies buried in the monastery of the Cordeliers in
that city, do not putrify, ii. 276 Throat of the great Greenland whale is so
narrow, that any animal larger than a herring could not enter, vi. 201 -- but
that of the cachalot can with great ease swallow an ox, vi. 218 -- that of the
shark most amazing, vi. 238 Thrush, a slender billed bird of the sparrow kind,
v. 314 -- its distinction from all of the kind -- its song very fine -- the
largest of the tribe with a musical voice, v. 320 -- its food, v. 321
Thumb-fotted shellfish, testaceous, described, vii. 60 Thunder, Ulloa heard it
rolling beneath him, when upon the Andes, i. 152 -- its cloud always moves
against the wind, i. 353 -- a sound produced by the opposition of two clouds,
and continued by reverberated echo -- thunder clears the air, and kills insects
noxious to vegetation, i. 374 -- resembled by the roaring of the lion heard in
the night, and reechoed by the mountains, iii. 224 Thuroid cartilage forms a
lump upon the windpipe in men, not seen in women, ii. 102 Tides, with Pliny,
were influenced partly by the sun, and in a greater degree by the moon, i. 251
-- Kepler first conjectured attraction the principal cause of them -- the
precise manner discovered by Newton, i. 252 -- high tides happen at the same
time, on opposite sides of the globe, where waters are farthest from the moon,
i. 253 -- solar and lunar tides -- greatest in syzigies, least in quadratures,
i. 255 -- flows strongest in narrowest places, i. 256 -- Mediterranean, Baltic,
and Black Sea, no sensible tides, the gulf of Venice excepted; and why, i. 257,
267 -- higher in the torrid zone, than in the rest of the ocean -- greatest at
the river Indus, rising thirty feet, i. 257 -- remarkably high on the coasts of
Malay, in the streights of Sunda, the Red Sea, the gulf of St. Lawrence, along
the coast of China and Japan, at Panama, and in the gulf of Bengal -- those at
Tonquin most remarkable in the world; one tide, and one ebb, in twenty-four
hours; twice in each month no tide at all, i. 258 -- in the streights of
Magellan it rises twenty feet, flows six hours, and the ebb lasts but two
hours, i. 259 Tiger, often bigger than the lion -- nothing tames it --
perfectly resembles the cat, iii. 234, 238 -- leaps twenty feet at a spring,
ii. 322 -- three sorts in Sundah Rajah's dominions, iii. 240 -- the royal tiger
-- carries a buffalo over its shoulder to its den, iii. 241 -- attacks the
lion, iii. 225 -- defeated by a stag, iii. 106 -- taught to defend herds, iii.
199 -- said to follow the rhinoceros for its excrements, iii. 236 -- other
tales about it, iii. 244 -- under Augustus, a tiger an extraordinary fight --
the species scarce -- opinion of Varo, that it was never taken alive, iii. 242
-- the ancients commended it for beauty among quadrupeds, equal to that of the
peacock among birds, iii. 233 -- supposed to bring forth four or five young at
a time, iii. 242, 243 -- expresses his resentment as the lion -- the skin
esteemed in the east, particularly in China, iii. 243 -- battle of one tiger,
and three elephants at Siam described, iii. 239 -- another between a tiger and
a crocodile, iii. 247, 248 -- the red tiger, Mr. Buffon's cougar, iii. 244 --
common in Guiana, Brazil, Paraguai, and other parts of South America, iii. 248
-- the flesh superior to mutton, iii. 249 -- and esteemed by the negroes as a
dainty, iii. 298 Tiger-cat, or cat-a-mountain, the ocelot of Mr. Buffon -- a
beautiful animal of its kind, iii. 255 Tigris, a great river in Asia, lost
under mount Taurus, i. 224. Tingitanians and Egyptians famous for the finest
horses in size and beauty, ii. 356 Tipula (water) of the second order of
insects -- description of it, vii. 358 Tipula, long legged gnat, description of
this insect -- only difference between it and the gnat, viii. 151 Titmouse, a
slender-billed bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 314 Toad, differences between the
frog and it, as to figure and conformation, vii. 73, 74 -- their nature,
appetites, and food -- coupling, vii. 92 -- difficulty in bringing forth, vii.
93 -- curious particulars relating to this animal, vii. 95 -- one swallowing a
be alive, the stomach stung, and the insect vomited up again, vii. 97 -- toads
not venomous -- accounts of toads taken inwardly, vii. 98, 99 -- their flesh
eaten as a delicacy on the coast of Guinea, iii. 298 -- a harmless, defenseless
creature, and unvenomous -- torpid in winter -- retreat then -- difficult to be
killed, vii. 100 -- lives for centuries in a rock, or within an oak, without
access, nourishment, or air, and yet found alive and perfect -- accounts of
this, vii. 101 -- toads suck cancerous breasts, and perform a cure -- progress
of this operation, vii. 102 -- the rubeth, the land-toad, alone has the
property of sucking, vii. 105 -- doubtful whether they die by internal or
external application of the cancerous matter -- varieties of the animal, vii.
106 -- some bigger than ducks, ii. 6 -- description of the Surinam toad, called
pipal, vii. 108 Tococo, sort of cry, given as a name in Canada to the flamingo;
and why, vi. 16 Toes, usually four in all animals of the poultry kind; in a
species of cock amount to five, v. 158 Tone, a continuing tone produced from a
non-elastic body, repeating blows quick and often, ii. 163 -- of a sonorous
body made to depend upon the number of vibrations, not the impelling force, is
mistaking an effect for a cause, ii. 164 -- half tones rejected in all
countries, where music is in its infancy, as in China, ii. 166 Tongres, a city
in the country of Liege, formerly encompassed by the sea, and at present
thirty-five leagues distant from it, i. 276 Tongue, the flamingo's much
celebrated, and larger than that of any other bird, vi. 15 -- of the great
Greenland whale, fills several hogsheads with blubber, vi. 196 -- of the
reindeer, a great delicacy, iii. 167 Tonquin, tides there the most remarkable
in the world, i. 258 Teeth, colored, the passion for them in China and Japan
-- in some parts of India black teeth desired with ardour, ii. 77 -- teeth of
animals various -- how formed in man, ii. 101 -- of the elephant, shed like
horns of deer, or obtained after death, not yet known -- natives of Africa find
them in their forests, iv. 281 -- of the narwhal surpasses ivory, vi. 213 --
ascribed to a different animal -- curiosity, and the desire of scarce things,
made them very valuable a century ago, vi. 215 -- the white shark is said to
have one hundred and forty-four teeth, vi. 239 Tornado, a formidable tempest,
so called by the Spaniards -- its description and dreadful effects, i. 361
Torpedo, its description, vi. 261 -- by an unaccountable power, the instant
touched, even with a stick, when immediately taken out of the sea, it numbs the
hand and arm, or whole body, vi. 262 to 266 -- the shock resembles an
electrical stroke; sudden, tingling, and painful -- account by Kempfer of
numbness produced by it, vi. 262 -- he believes holding in the breath prevents
the violence; implicit belief of efficacy would be painfully undeceived, vi.
263 -- this power not exerted upon every occasion -- trials by Reaumur to this
purpose -- opinions concerning the cause of this strange effect, vi. 264, 265
-- the fish dead, the power destroyed, then handled or eaten with security --
the power not extended to the degree some believe, reaching the fishermen at
the end of the line, or numbing fishes in the same pond -- ridiculous excess of
this numbing quality in the history of Abyssinia, by Godignus -- Lorenzini,
from experiments, is convinced the power resides in two thin muscles of the
back, vi. 266 -- several fishes have acquired the name of torpedo, possessed of
the same quality -- Moore's and Condamine's accounts of them, vi. 267 Tortoise,
ranked among crustaceous fishes, though superior to them all -- amphibious,
according to Seba -- distinguished in two classes, the land tortoise, and the
sea turtle, vi. 380 -- differ more in habits than conformation, 381 --
description, 382, 383 -- principal distinctions, 384 -- varieties are,
trunk-turtle, loggerhead, hawks-bill, and green-turtle, vi. 396 -- all
generally found in warm countries, without retiring, 393 -- the shell never
changes, and growing with the body, is formed in pieces, vi. 392 -- a defense
against dangerous attacks, vi. 386 -- the blood warm and red, vi, 380 -- how
circulated, vi. 383, 388 -- turtle larger than tortoise, vi. 393 -- weighs from
fifty to five hundred pounds -- ancients speak of some of amazing sizes, vi.
399 -- live to eighty and a hundred and twenty years, vi. 387 -- can live
without limbs, head, or brain, proved by experiments of Redi, vi. 386, 387 --
moves with great weight upon it, vi. 382, 400 -- hears distinctly, by means of
an auditory conduit opening into the mouth, vi. 404 -- sighs when ill situated,
and sheds tears when distressed, vi. 405 -- torpid during winter, sleeping in
some cave, and breathing imperceptibly, vi. 389 -- account of a land tortoise
caught in a canal at Amsterdam, vi. 380, 381 -- and of a turtle in the Loire in
1729, vi. 394 -- the food chiefly vegetables, though believed to eat insects,
snails, and bugs, vi. 392, vii. 25. See Turtle. Toucan, a bird of the pie kind,
has a bill as large as its body -- of five varieties; the red-beaked described,
v. 243 -- its food, v. 244, 245 -- pepper voided unconcocted by the toucan,
preferred to that fresh gathered, v. 244 -- Pozzo bred one tame -- its habits
and food, v. 245 -- has birds, men, monkies, and serpents to guard against --
scoops out its nest into the hollow of some tree, leaves scarce room to go in
and out, and with its great beak guards that entrance, v. 246 -- found only in
warm parts of South America, where it is valued for its tender and nourishing
flesh, and the beauty of its plumage, particularly the breast, the skin of
which the Indians dry and glue to their cheeks for beauty, vi. 247 Touch, those
parts of the body most exercised in touching, acquire the greatest degree of
accuracy -- the fingers, by long habit, not from a greater quantity of nerves,
become masters in the art, ii. 185 Tournefort, describes a spout seen in the
Mediterranean, i. 390, 395 -- solutions offered for this surprising phenomenon,
i. 393 Trachinus, the weever, a prickly-finned jugular fish, described, vi. 306
Trachipterus, the sabre, a prickly-finned thoracic fish -- its description, vi.
309 Track of a stag, manner of knowing it, and that of a hind, iii. 115 Trade,
of hair of animals, driven by the inhabitants of Angora, iii. 58 Tragelaphus,
name of a stag with the ancients -- found in the forests of Germany, and called
by the natives bran deer, or the brown deer, iii. 122 Traps for horses, used by
the Arabians for the wild sort, ii. 348 -- for wild asses, also used in the
Archipelago, ii. 377 -- for mice, described in variety by Gesner, iv. 74
Treacle, food for bees during winter, when robbed of their honey, viii. 75
Trees, (fossil) in the body of solid rocks, and deep under the earth upon which
they once grew -- conjectures upon this subject, i. 49, 50 -- found in
quantities at the mouth of the river Ness in Flanders, at the depth of fifty
feet, i. 281 -- laying twenty feet deep under ground for many ages, becomes
hard and tough, proofs of alternate overflowings and desertions of the sea, i.
284 -- usually of the largest kinds in wide uncultivated wildernesses, in the
state of rude nature, ii. 10 -- the banana and plantane, so immense, as to be
inimically inhabited by monkies, snakes, and birds of the most delightful
plumage, v. 255 -- age known by the number of their circles, vi. 176 Trembley,
first discovered in the polypus the power of reproduction in animals, viii. 172
Trichurus, a prickly finned apodal fish of a sword like form, described, vi.
305 Trigla, the gurnard, of the spinous kind, description of this fish, vi. 309
Trochus, the snails of that kind have no mouth -- their trunk -- are among
snails, what the tiger, eagle, or shark are among beasts, birds, or fishes,
vii. 33 Troglodyte of Bontius, is the ouran-outang, or wild man of the woods,
iv. 189 Troglodytes, the mountain of that name in Arabia has a passage through
it made by a disruption, as if artificial, i. 157 Tropical seas, are those in
which spouts are seen very commonly, i. 390 -- the climates so hot, dogs in
process of time lose the delicacy of their scent entirely, and why, iii. 262 --
under them, and for a good space beyond, tempests are frequent, and their
effects anticipated, i. 356 -- supposed by Linnaeus the native spot of man, and
the northern climates only places of sojourning for them -- an argument
sufficing to prove the contrary, ii. 240 Trumpets, increase sounds, in the same
manner as the telescope does bodies -- persons hard of hearing find the same
advantage in the trumpet made for this purpose, that the short-sighted persons
do from glasses; were they farther enlarged, they could be used to advantage
only in a place of solitude and stillness, as the multitude of sounds would
produce tumult and confusion, ii. 174 Trunks of animals, that of the elephant
described, iv. 259 -- that of the gnat may justly be deemed one of nature's
masterpieces, viii. 154 Trygon, the fireflare, the enchantress Circe armed her
son with a spear headed with the spine of this fish, vi. 260 Tubes of glass,
drawn as fine as a hair, still preserve their hollow within, i. 192 Tubular
vessels, discovered by Fallopius, and called his tubes, ii. 17 Tufted-duck, a
variety of the kind, native of Europe, vi. 129 Tumble-dung, a strong beetle,
remarkable for make and manners, viii. 137 Tumbler, in the division of Dr.
Caius, a dog of the first class, or generous kind, iii. 286 -- supposed the
lurcher, and described, iii. 288 Turbinated shells, are univalves, and the
first kind of Aristotle's division, vii. 12 Turbits, variety of the tame
pigeons, obtained by cross breed, v. 293 Turbots, (and rays) extremely delicate
in their choice of baits; a piece of herring or haddock twelve hours out of the
sea, and used as a bait, will not be touched, vi. 257 -- growth of turbots, vi.
340 Turkey, bird of the poultry kind -- its native country disputed; arguments
for the old and new continent -- first seen in France, in the reign of Francis
I. and in England in that of Henry VIII. v. 177 -- its tenderness with us, when
young, argues not for our climate -- in the wild state, hardy and numerous in
the snowy forests of Canada -- also larger and more beautiful than in the
domestic state -- the savages weave the feathers into cloaks, and fashion them
into fans and umbrellas, v. 178 -- hunting the turkey a principal diversion
with them, its flesh chiefly supporting their families -- manner of hunting, v.
179 Turkeys, a stupid, vain tribe, quarreling among themselves -- the cock's
antipathy to red -- bristles, and flies to attack it -- manner of increasing
their animosity for diversion -- weak and cowardly against the weakest animals
that dare face them, v. 180 the cock pursues what flies from him, as lap-dogs
and children, then returns to his train, displays his plumage, and struts about
-- the female milder, gentler, and particularly fond of ants and caterpillars
eggs -- lays eighteen or twenty eggs, larger than a hen -- the young very
tender at first, must be carefully attended to, v. 180 -- account of Abbe
Pluche, of a turkey-hen and her brood at the sight of a bird of prey, v. 182 --
turkies of Norfolk the largest of this kingdom, some weigh thirty pounds; in
East India, in domestic state, grow to weigh sixty pounds, v. 183 Turkey, in
Asia, has in different parts horses of almost all races, ii. 361 -- lions found
to diminish in number in this country, iii. 215 Turnings of rivers, more
numerous as they approach the sea, become indications through trackless lands
-- the bends increasing, form different channels and mouths into the sea, as
the Danube, Nile, Wolga, i. 203 Turn-spit, a dog of the mongrel kind, and the
lower class of Dr. Caius's division, iii. 286 Turnstone, a small bird of the
crane kind, vi. 23 -- likes colder climates in summer, or wildest and moistest
parts in this country -- is a bird of passage, 28 Turtle-dove, one of the
ruminating birds, or with a power of disgorging food to feed its young, iii. 5
Turtle, propagated on shore only -- comes from sea on purpose in coupling
season, vi. 400, 401 -- female is passive and reluctant; the male is slow, but
grasps so fast nothing can loose the hold, vi. 401 -- prepares for laying, and
deposits her eggs in the sand, where in twenty-six days they are hatched by the
sun, vi. 391, 401 to 407 -- lay from one hundred and fifty to two hundred in a
season, vi. 391 -- the young from the egg, with their shell, seek their food
untaught, and at the size of quails, run by instinct to the sea, ignorant of
all danger, vi. 391, 403 Turtle, article of commerce, the shell put to many
uses; of the hawk's-bill the finest, consists of eight flat, and five hollow
plates, vi. 396 -- how manufactured, 397 -- the flesh, particularly of the
green turtle, prized as a delicacy, and is wholesome, vi. 398 -- the great
Mediterranean the largest of all, unfit and unsafe to eat; its shell is
unprofitable for use, vi. 393 to 395 -- several ways of catching turtles, vi.
404 to 406 Tusks, of the babyrouessa a fine ivory, smoother and whiter than the
elephant's, but not so hard -- of enormous size, iii, 194 -- of castrated
animals scarce appear without the lips, iii. 197 -- those of a boar, sometimes
a foot long, iii. 172 -- broken, abate his fierceness and venery, producing
nearly the same effect as castration, iii. 197 -- of the mammouth weigh four
hundred pounds; those of the elephant from Africa, two hundred and fifty --
some remarkable lately found near the Ohio, and Miume in America, vi. 282 --
Dr. Hunter thinks them of a larger animal than the elephant, iv. 283 -- of the
narwhal, or sea unicorn, a cetaceous fish with teeth, from nine to fourteen
feet long, vi. 211, 213 Twins, never, while infants, so large or strong as
children that come singly into the world, and why, ii. 48 Typhons, spouts so
called seen at land, differ in several respects from those at sea, i. 394
Tyson, (Dr.) his description of an ouran-outang, by the name of pygmy, the best
and most exact, iv. 191
U.
Valerian, a plant of which cats are excessively sond, iii. 206 Valle, (Pietro)
his description of Persian horses, ii. 361 Vampyre, a foreign bat, having the
reputed faculty of drawing blood from persons asleep; and thus destroying them
before they awake, iv. 144. See Bat. Vansire, a sort of ferret of Madagascar,
according to Mr. Buffon, iii. 362 Vapor of metals in mines not so noxious, as
those of substances with which ores are usually united, such as arsenic,
cinabar, etc. -- fragrance of their smell -- warnings about them, i. 79, 80 --
disengaged from water, and attenuated, ascends into the atmosphere, where
condensed and acquiring weight as it rolls, falls down in a shape suitable to
the temperature of its elevation, i. 370 to 374 -- most foetid, breathed from
the jaws of the wolf, iii. 323 Varenius, his Opinion upon the formation of
rivers, i. 199 Vari, a kind of maki, last of the monkey-kind, iv. 240 -- its
description, iv. 241 Vault, go to vault, phrase used by hunters when the hare
enters holes like the rabbit, iv. 10 Vegetables, totally unprotected, and
exposed to every assailant, ii. 2 -- those in a dry and sunny soil, are strong
and vigorous, not luxuriant; and those the joint product of heat and moisture,
are luxuriant and tender, ii. 5 -- but few noxious -- that life as much
promoted by human industry, as animal life is diminished, ii. 13 -- not
possessed of one power which animals have, the actual ability, or awkward
attempt at self-preservation, viii. 163 -- vegetable-earth -- the bed of it in
an inhabited country, must be always diminishing, and why, i. 56 -- plant, with
a round bulbous head, which, when dried, becomes of amazing elasticity, grows
near the extremity of that region, on mountains, where continual frost reigns,
i. 151 -- vegetables cover the bottom of many parts of the sea, ii. 6 -- those
called marine grow to a monstrous size, viii. 179 -- different kinds
appropriated to different appetites of animals, and why -- birds distribute the
seeds of vegetables where they fly, ii. 5 -- the ass gives preference over
others to the plantane, ii. 381 -- the sole food of ruminating animals, iii. 1
-- animals feeding on vegetables most inoffensive and timorous, iv. 3 -- some
possessed of motion -- what constitutes the difference between animal and
vegetable life, difficult, if not impossible to answer, viii. 161 -- like
fluids and mineral substances, produce air in a copious manner, i. 318
Vegetation, anticipated in its progress by bees, viii. 74 Velino, a river in
Italy, has a cataract of a hundred and fifty feet perpendicular in height, i.
222 Velocity, not alone the actuating force of winds, but also the degree of
density, i. 355 Velvet, like downy substance upon the skin covering the skull,
when the horn of a deer is fallen off, iii. 96 Velvet-duck, a variety of the
common duck, a native of the European dominions, vi. 129 Venery, partridges
immoderately addicted to it, to an unnatural degree, v. 209 Venom, given to the
weapon of the fireflare by Pliny, Aelian, and Oppian, in a degree to affect the
inanimate creation, vi. 259 -- many reasons to doubt of it, 260 Venus, the
Grecian, her nose such as at present would be deemed an actual deformity, ii.
76 -- a modern lady's face, like that of the Venus of Medicis, would scarce be
thought beautiful, except by the lovers of antiquity, ii. 265 Verges, or
orifices of the snails, are two, one active, the other passive, vii. 31 Vermin,
hospitals erected by the Bramins in India for the maintenance of all kind of
vermin, ii. 225 -- less found with asses, than with other animals covered with
hair, ii. 386 Vertigo in goats produced by immoderate cold, iii. 53, 54
Vesuvius, its eruptions -- the most remarkable described by Valetta, i. 91 to
94 -- account of another by bishop Berkley, i. 94. to 98 Vibrations of a bell
cease to be heard when under the receiver of an air-pump, i. 334 -- the tone of
a sonorous body made to depend upon the number of vibrations, not the force, is
a mistake of an effect for a cause, ii. 164. Vineta, a port of Pomerania,
overflowed and destroyed by the Baltic, i. 278 Violet-crab of the Caribbee
islands, most noted for shape, delicacy of flesh, and singularity of manners,
vi. 368 Viper, most vivacious of reptiles -- experiment on a viper in the
receiver of the air-pump by Mr. Boil, i. 316 -- kept in boxes for six or eight
months without any food, vii. 179 -- its progressive motion, vii. 180 -- the
only animal in Great Britain whose bite is feared, vii. 203 -- do not devour
their young -- their food, vii. 205 -- by the application of sallad-oil, the
bite of the viper effectually cured -- who first discovered this remedy --
effects of the viper's bite, vii. 206, 207 Vision, its errors -- objects
represented upside-down and double, ii. 147, 148 -- the point without
sensation, ii. 150 -- and want of measure for distance, ii. 151 Viviparous and
oviparous animals, the two classes for generation and production -- all other
modes held imaginary and erroneous, ii. 22 -- the blenny, a spinous fish,
brings forth two or three hundred young at a time, alive and playing around,
vi. 177 Ukraine, the cattle there become very fat, and considered the largest
of all Europe, iii. 19 Ulloa, his description of part of South America, of
Cotopaxi, of Quito, of the Andes, and a volcano, i. 99 to 103 Umbilical
vessels, those of the placenta to the foetus, ii. 41 Unan, one of the two kinds
of the sloth, an animal about the size of a badger, iv. 343 Under-hung,
expression among painters, meaning a prominent under jaw, ii. 91 Understanding,
comparative progress of it -- greater in infants, than in children of three or
four years old, ii. 61 Undulations in elastic bodies supposed by the ear one
continued sound, though in reality many, ii. 163 Unicorn of the sea, a whale
with teeth in the upper jaw, its description, vi. 211. See Narwhal. Univalve
shells, first division by Aristotle, as to figure, vii. 12 Voice of birds much
louder to their bulk than animals of other kinds -- set to music by father
Kircher, v. 143 Volatile caustic salt obtained in great quantity from the
cantharides flies, viii. 143 Volcano, considered as a cannon of immense size,
the mouth near two miles circumference, i. 87 -- opinions of philosophers and
ignorant men about it, i. 88 -- the real causes -- three very remarkable in
Europe, and which, i. 89 -- Albouras, most famous in Asia -- one in the island
of Ternate, i. 98 -- in the Molucca islands, in Japan, in Java and Sumatra, in
the Cape de Verd islands, the peak in Teneriffe; also in America, i. 99 --
marine ones not very frequent, and why, i. 130 Vomit, black, a mortal symptom
of the distemper called chapatonadas, in America, i. 323 Uranoscopus, a
prickly-finned apodal fish, description of it, vi. 306 Urchins, or echini, a
multivalve shellfish, vii. 61 -- manner of exhibiting this extraordinary
animal in every light, vii. 61, 62 -- its description, vii. 62 -- some kinds as
good eating as the lobster, and its eggs considered as a great delicacy, vii.
63 Urinary passages, effects of the cantharides falling principally upon them,
viii. 143 Urine of animals found efficacious in some disorders, iii. 69 -- of
the lion insupportable, iii. 224 -- of camels, an ingredient in sal ammoniac,
iv. 311 -- of birds differs from that of other animals, v. 17 Urson, or Hudson,
of the hedgehog kind, a native of Hudson's Bay, iv. 114 -- its description --
sleeps much, and feeds upon the bark of juniper -- in winter snow serves it as
drink, and in summer it laps water like a dog, iv. 115 Urus and bison in fact
descendants of one common stock; and naturalists, assigning them different
classes, have separated what is really united, iii. 15, 16 -- this wild bull
chiefly met with in Lithuania -- description of it, iii. 16 -- generally taken
by pitfalls, iii. 17 -- the breed chiefly occupies the cold and temperate
zones, iii. 20 Vulture-kind, its distinctive marks from other kinds of
carnivorous birds -- the flesh liked and dressed for eating, according to
Bellonius, v. 85 -- seldom attacks living animals when supplied with dead, v.
107 -- description of the golden vulture, v. 108 -- vulture and dog, about
Grand Cairo in Egypt, keep together in a sociable friendly manner, and bring up
their young in the same nest, iii. 304 -- of Senegal, said to carry off
children, probably no other than the condor, v. 105 Vulture, bird of prey, next
in rank to the eagle, less generous and bold, v. 107 -- countries where found
-- unknown in England, v. 109 -- flocks of them near Grand Cairo not permitted
to be destroyed, as they devour all the filth and carrion there -- in company
with wild dogs, tear and devour together without quarrelling, v. 110 --
wonderful method of separating the flesh from the bones, and leaving the skin
entire, v. 111 -- smell carrion from afar -- follow those that hunt for skins
alone, and so voraciously fill themselves as merely to waddle, and to want
disgorging before they fly away -- are little apprehensive of danger, and allow
themselves to be approached -- an eagle falling in upon their meals, keeps them
at distance till he be satiated -- an ox returning home alone, lying down by
the way, becomes their prey, and is devoured alive -- attempt oxen grazing,
destroy lambs, and feed much upon serpents, rabbits, hares and what game they
can overpower -- also demolish whole broods of crocodiles, v. 111 to 114 -- lay
two eggs at a time, and produce but once a year -- make nests in inaccessible
cliffs and remotest places -- their flesh lean, stringy, nauseous, tasting and
smelling of carrion, v. 114 -- the down of their wing makes a pretty kind of
fur, commonly sold in the Asiatic markets, v. 109 King of Vultures, description
of this bird, v. 115, 116
W.
Waists of European women displease Linnaeus, who, in a catalogue of monsters,
particularly adds their slender waists, ii. 243 Walfischaas, whales provender,
insects floating in clusters on the surface of the sea, and called medusa by
Linnaeus, vi. 202 Walnut-trees, with walnuts on the stem, leaves and branches,
in exact preservation, found at twenty- in six feet depth round the city of
Modena in Italy, i. 282 Wanderow, a baboon less than the mandril, its
description -- chiefly seen in the woods of Ceylon and Malabar, iv. 215 Wappe,
dog of the mongrel kind, in the third division of Dr. Caius, iii. 286 Warbling
of birds, so loud and various in modulation, not easily accounted for, v. 14
Warine, the Brasilian guariba, largest of the monkey-kind, found in America,
iv. 235 -- its description, iv. 236 Warree, hog of the isthmus of Darien,
described by Wafer, iii. 196 Warwickshire rams not uncommonly worth fifty
guineas, iii. 44 Wasps, ruminating insects, or seemingly such, iii. 6 -- their
description and habits -- their habitation scarcely completed when the
inhabitant dies -- have two or three hundred queens in a hive, viii. 96, 97 --
their nest a most curious object, viii. 97 to 100 -- the social wasps gather no
honey themselves, though fond of sweets, viii. 102 -- fierce battles with the
bees, who make up by conduct and numbers the deficiency of prowess, viii. 103
-- their depredations, viii. 102 -- where found, other flies desert the place,
viii. 103 -- live but one season, viii. 104 -- cannot endure winter -- before
new year they wither and die, having butchered their young -- in every nest,
one or two females survive -- impregnated the preceding season, she begins in
spring to lay eggs -- and before June produces ten thousand young, which are
nursed and fed by her alone, viii. 105 -- solitary wasp, its manners, viii. 106
-- provisions made for the young at leaving the egg -- the provisions arranged
and laid in, the old one closes the hole and dies -- the young leaving the egg
are scarcely visible, viii. 108 -- how the life of the young is spent -- wasps
of Europe innocent compared to those of tropical climate -- description of
those of the West Indies, and their habits, viii. 109 -- pains of their sting
insupportable, more terrible than of a scorpion, the part swells, and people
are so disfigured as scarce to be known, viii. 110 Water, its parts infinitely
small, driven through the pores of gold, penetrating through all substances,
except glass -- enter the composition of all bodies, vegetable, animal, and
fossil, i. 164, 165 -- birds, beasts, fishes, insects, trees, and vegetables,
with their parts, have growth from it, and by putrefaction become water, i. 165
-- gives all other bodies firmness and durability, i. 163 -- a phial
hermetically sealed, kept fifty years, deposed no sediment, and continued
transparent, i. 168 -- gathered after a thunderclap in sultry weather, deposits
a real salt, i. 169 spring water collected from the air -- of river waters, the
Indus and the Thames offer the most light and wholesome, i. 170 -- lightness,
and not transparency, the test of purity, i. 171 -- purest water distilled from
snow on tops of highest mountains -- different kinds adapted to different
constitutions, i. 172 -- water of the sea heavier and more buoyant than
freshwater, i. 241 -- very transparent, i. 171 -- fresh water at sea putrifies
twice, sometimes thrice in a voyage -- a month at sea, sends up a noisome and
dangerous vapor, which takes fire from a flame, i. 173 -- elementary water not
compounded, i. 174 -- is ice kept in fusion, i. 175 -- dilates in bulk by cold,
i. 176 -- confirmed by experiments, i. 178 -- very compressible and elastic, i.
180 -- made to resemble air, i. 183 -- a drop of water converted into steam
capable of raising twenty ton weight, i. 184 -- keeps its surface level and
even, i. 185 -- a single quart sufficient to burst a hogshead, and how, i. 187,
et seq. -- of the sea kept sweet by motion, i. 249 -- converted into rushing
air, and again into its former state, i. 337 -- the bramins of India smell the
water they drink, to us quite inodorous, ii. 180 Water-spouts, burst from the
sea, and join mists immediately above them, i. 377 -- most surprising
phoenomena, dreadful to mariners, and astonishing to observers of nature,
common in the tropical seas, sometimes in our own -- description of those seen
by Tournefort in the Mediterranean, i. 390 to 193 -- solutions offered for this
surprising phoenomenon, i. 393 to 396 Water-wagtail, slender-billed bird of the
sparrow-kind, living upon insects, v. 314 Waves, their luminous appearance in
the night, and the cause, i. 247 Wax of two kinds gathered by common bees,
viii. 88 -- the first fifteen days, the bees make more wax than during the rest
of the year, viii. 86 -- that produced by black bees in tropical climates only
used for medicinal purposes, being too soft for candles, as in Europe, viii. 90
Weasel, a small carnivorous animal; marks common to the kind, iii. 346, 347 --
these differ from the cat-kind in the formation and disposition of claws --
differ from the dog-kind in a clothing of fur rather than hair, iii. 346 --
one of the species is like all the rest, iii. 347 -- this the smallest of the
whole kind, iii. 348 -- its description -- untameable and untractable, iii. 349
-- hides and sleeps three parts of the day, and sallies forth for prey in the
evening, iii. 350 -- attacks animals much above its own size, iii. 349 --
catches rats and mice better than cats; also small birds -- destroys young
poultry, and sucks the eggs -- so nimbly runs up high walls, no place is secure
from it, iii. 350, 351 -- in cultivated lands, it thins the number of hurtful
vermin, iii. 359 -- never cries but when struck -- all the kind has glands near
the anus, secreting a substance foetid in some, and a perfume in others, iii.
347 -- this most offensive in summer, and insufferable when irritated, iii. 152
-- one sort in America is by sailors called the stinkard. See Stinkards.
Confined to a cage, is ever in uneasy agitation -- must have leave to hide
itself -- eats only by stealth, and will not touch the food until it begins to
putrefy, iii. 349, 350 -- the female makes an easy bed for her young, and
generally brings forth from three to five at a time, and with closed eyes, iii.
351 -- account of a weasel's forming her (...), and bringing forth her young in
the putrid carcass of a wolf, iii. 352 -- the white ermine found in Great
Britain is called the white weasel -- its fur among us of no value, iii. 358 --
of the weasel kind, the martin the most pleasing, iii. 368 -- the boldest and
most useful of all is the ichneumon, iii. 376 Weather, the moist alone prevents
evaporation, i. 371 Weathercocks often erroneous with Derham in regard to upper
regions, i. 353 Weed floating over great tracts of the sea serve as sustenance
for many fish bearing similitude with such vegetables, ii. 7 Weever, the
trachinus, a prickly-finned jugular fish, its description vi. 306 -- the sting
given by its back-fin is poisonous, vi. 348 Weight of the human body often
found to differ from itself -- instances of it -- the difference often amounts
to a pound, or sometimes to a pound and a half, not easy to conceive whence
this adventitious weight is derived, ii. 110 -- the porters of Constantinople
carry burdens of nine hundred pounds weight -- a man able to raise a weight of
two thousand pounds -- a horse will not carry upon its back above two or three
hundred pounds -- whence this seeming superiority comes, ii. 112 Well, burning,
at Brosely, now stopped, had a firedamp in it, which would kindle with the
flame of a candle, i. 86 -- some continue full, affected neither by rains nor
droughts, i. 282 Welland, river near Spalding, has amazing shoals of
sticklebacks caught in it, vi. 334 Were, Sebald, a traveller, confirms the
existence of giants, on a coast of South America, toward the streights of
Magallan, ii. 261 Whale, the largest animal known, no precise anatomy of this
fish yet given -- two centuries ago they were described two hundred and fifty
feet long, vi. 186 to 198 -- the Biscayneers practiced the whale-fishery near
Greenland soon after the year 1300, i. 205 -- seven different kinds,
distinguished by external figure or internal conformation, i. 193 -- are
gregarious animals, make migrations from one ocean to another, i. 201 -- and
generally resort where they have the least disturbance, 192 -- great Greenland
whale, its description, vi. 194 -- from sixty to seventy feet long, -- the head
one third of its bulk, vi. 194 -- its hearing is acute, vi. 196 -- breathes air
at the surface of the water, and cannot remain under it like other fishes, vi.
169 -- it blows loudly through the spout-holes, and most fiercely when wounded
-- whalebone different from the bones of the body, v. 197 -- the fins are from
five to eight feet long, vi. 194 -- the throat is narrow, nothing larger than a
herring can be swallowed, vi. 202 -- the tail, its only weapon of defense, is
twenty-four feet broad, and strikes hard blows, vi. 194 -- one seen by Ray
marbled, with the figures 122 distinctly marked upon it, vi. 195 -- the blubber
and other parts turn out to very good account -- the flesh palatable to some
nations, vi. 209, 210 -- the female and male keep much together; their fidelity
exceeds that of birds -- instance of it, vi. 199 -- do not cross breeds -- she
goes with young nine or ten months, is then fatter than at other times --
produces two breasts and teats at pleasure -- suckles her young a year, and how
-- is very tender of them -- defends them fiercely when pursued -- instance of
it -- dives with them, and comes up soon to give them breath -- during the
first year, called short-heads, and then yield fifty barrels of blubber -- at
two years, they are stunts, and after that skull-fish, 199, 200 -- the food of
this animal, an insect called medusa by Linnaeus, and walfischaas by the
Icelanders -- pursues no other fish, and is inoffensive in its element, vi. 202
-- the whale-louse, of the shellfish kind, sticks to its body as to the foul
bottom of a ship, gets under the fins, and eats through the skin into the fat,
vi. 203 -- the sword-fish affrights the whale, avoids the stroke of its tail,
bounds upon its back, and cuts into it with the toothed edges of its bill, vi.
203, 204 -- the killer, a cetaceous fish of great strength, With powerful
teeth, beset the whale as dogs do a bull, tear it down, and then devour only
its tongue, vi. 204 -- old manner of taking whales, vi. 206 to 208 --
improvements hinted, vi. 209 Spermaceti Whale, the cachalot, has teeth in the
under jaw -- is less than the whale, about sixty feet long, and sixteen high --
can remain longer under water; and the head makes one half of the whole -- is
voracious and destructive even to dolphins and porpoises, vi. 217, 218 -- seven
distinctions in this tribe, vi. 217 -- contain two precious drugs, the
spermaceti and ambergris; the latter mostly in older fishes, vi. 219 to 221.
See Cachalot. Wheat and currants, swallowed whole, indigestible to man; so may
many kinds of food be in the stomachs of animals, v. 74 Wheat-ear, a thick
short-billed bird of the sparrow-kind, thought foreign, v. 315 -- it migrates
before winter, v. 318 Whin-chat, a slender-billed bird of the sparrow-kind, v.
314 -- bird of passage, v. 318 Whip-snake, a very venomous serpent of the east,
is five feet long, and its bite kills in six hours time, vii. 214, 215
Whirlpool, manner in which it is formed, i. 265 -- those of the ocean
particularly dangerous, i. 267 -- the central point always lowest, and why, i.
205 Whirlwind, the most rapid formed by united contributions of minerals,
vegetables, and animals, increasing the current of air, i. 338 Whiskers, a man
without them formerly considered as unfit for company in Spain; nature denying,
art supplied the deficiency -- a Spanish general borrowing money from the
Venetians, pawned his whiskers, and took care to release them -- part of the
religion of the Tartars consists in the management of their whiskers; and they
waged war with the Persians as infidels, whose whiskers had not the orthodox
cut, ii. 96 -- the kings of Persia wore them matted with gold thread; and the
kings of France, of the first races, had them knotted and buttoned with gold,
ii. 96, 97 Whiston, his reasoning concerning the theory of the earth -- finds
water enough in the tail of a comet for the universal deluge, i. 28, to 32
White, the natural color of man, all other tints proceed from greater or
lesser heat of climates, ii. 233 -- among white races of people, our own
country bids fairest for pre-eminence, ii. 235 White-bait, shoals appear near
Greenwich in July; and seem the young of some animal not come to perfect form,
vi. 337 White-nose, the moustoc, monkey of the ancient continent, a beautiful
little animal -- its description -- a native of the Gold Coast, iv. 234
White-throat, a slender-billed bird of the sparrow-kind, living upon insects,
v. 314 Widgeon, a variety of the European duck described, but best known by its
whistling sound, vi. 130 Wild man of the woods, the ouran-outang, foremost of
the ape-kind -- this name given to various animals walking upright, but from
different countries, and of different proportions and powers -- the troglodyte
of Bontius, the drill of Purchase, pygmy of Tyson, and pongo of Battle, have all
this general name, iv. 189 Wind, a current of air -- artificial, i. 337 --
causes assigned for the variety, activity, continual change, and uncertain
duration of it, i. 338 -- in what manner to foretell the certainty of a wind, as
the return of an eclipse -- to account for variations of wind upon land, not at
present expected, i. 339 -- recourse to be had to the ocean -- and why -- in
many parts of the world the winds pay stated visits -- in some places they blow
one way by day, and another by night; in others, for one half year they go in a
direction contrary to their former course; in some places the winds never
change, i. 340 -- the wind which never varies is the great universal wind,
blowing from the east to the west, in all extensive oceans, where the land does
not break the general current, i. 341, 342 -- the other winds are deviations of
its current -- many theories to explain the motion of the winds -- that of Dr.
Lyster -- theory of Cartesius -- Dr. Halley's more plausible, i. 342, et seq.
Trade-winds, blow from the poles toward the equator, i. 343, 344 -- were the
surface of the globe sea, the winds would be constant, and blow in one
direction -- various circumstances break its current, and drive it back against
its general course, forcing it upon coasts that face the west, i. 344, 345 --
want of a true system of trade-winds, supplied by an imperfect history of them
-- north wind prevails during October, November, December, and January, in the
Atlantic, under the temperate zone -- north wind reigns during the winter of
Nova Zembla, and other arctic countries -- south wind prevails during July in
the Cape de Verde islands -- north-west wind blows during September at the Cape
of Good Hope -- regular winds produced by various causes upon land -- ancient
Greeks first observed them, i. 346, 347 -- in general, wherever a strong
current of water, there is a wind to attend it -- regular wind produced by the
flux and reflux of the sea -- winds called monsoons, i. 347 -- some peculiar to
certain coasts -- south wind constant upon those of Chili and Peru -- other
winds particular to various coasts, i. 348, 349 Winds at land puff by
intervals, and why -- not so at sea, i. 352 -- east wind more constant than any
oother, and generally most powerful -- wind blowing one way, and clouds moving
another, forerunners of thunder -- cause of this surprising appearance remains
a secret, i. 353 -- from sea, generally moister than those over tracts of land
-- more boisterous in spring and autumn than at other seasons, i. 354 -- their
force does not depend upon velocity alone, but also upon density -- reflected
from sides of mountains and towers, often more powerful than in direct
progression, i. 355 -- raise sandy deserts in one country, to deposit them upon
some other -- south winds in summer, so hot in Egypt as almost to stop
respiration, and produce epidemic disorders, continuing for any length of time,
i. 357 -- deadly along the coasts of the Persian Gulf, and of India, i. 359 --
assume a visible form, i. 358 Windpipe, in men has a lump not seen in women,
ii. 102 -- makes convolutions within a bird, and is called the labyrinth, v. 13
-- this difference obtains in birds seemingly of the same species, v. 14 --
strange in the throat of the crane, v. 377 -- of the bittern, vi. 2 -- in the
wild swan, vi. 114 Wings of birds, answer forelegs of quadrupeds -- their
description -- bastard wing, v. 7 -- flap of a swan's wing break's a man's leg;
a similar blow from an eagle lays a man dead instantly, v. 9 -- of butterflies,
distinguish them from flies of other kinds -- their number and beautiful
colors, viii. 33 Winter beginning round the poles, the misty appearance of
heat in southern climates is there produced by cold, i. 378, 386 Wistiti, a
monkey of the sagoin kind, remarkable for the tufts of hair upon its face, and
its annulated tail, iv. 237 Wolga, its length -- abounds with water in May and
June; at other times very shallow -- the English disappointed in a trade into
Persia through it, i. 209 -- receives thirty-three lesser rivers in its course,
i. 217 -- and has seventy openings into the Caspian sea, i. 131 Wolf, a fierce,
strong, cunning carnivorous quadruped, externally and internally so nearly
resembling the dog, they seem modelled alike, yet have a perfect antipathy to
each other, iii. 309 -- description of the wolf, iii. 306 -- principal
distinction from the dog is the eye, which opens slantingly upwards in the same
direction with the nose, iii. 307 -- also the tail is long, bushy, hanging lank
-- the wolf lives about twenty years -- is not much with those of his kind, yet
hunts in packs with them, iii. 311 -- quarelling, they devour each other, iii.
110 is watchful and easily waked -- supplied with water, lives four or five
days without food -- carries off a sheep without touching the ground, and runs
with it swifter than the shepherds his pursuers, iii. 315 -- smells a carcass
at a great distance, iii. 316 -- leaving the wood, goes out against the wind --
particularly fond of human flesh -- follow armies, and arrive in numbers upon a
field of battle -- two or three wolves keep a province for a time in continual
alarm, iii. 317 -- distinguished by huntsmen into young, old, and great wolf --
manner of hunting them, iii. 318 -- young dogs shudder at their sight, iii. 309
-- the wolf killed, no dogs show an appetite to enjoy their victory, iii. 318
-- the flesh so very indifferent, no creature eats it but the kind itself --
breathe a most foetid vapor from their jaws, iii. 323 -- often die of hunger,
after running mad by furious agitations, iii. 109 -- season for coupling lasts
but fifteen days -- no strong attachment appears between male and female; seek
each other only once a year -- couple in winter, several males then follow one
female, dispute cruelly, growl, and tear each other, and sometimes kill that
preferred by the female -- she flies from all with the chosen when the rest are
asleep, iii. 311 -- males pass from one female to the other -- time of
pregnancy about three months and a half -- couple like the dog, and the
separation hindered by the same cause -- bring forth five or six, to nine at a
litter -- the cubs brought forth with eyes closed, iii. 312 -- young wolves
play with hares or birds brought by their dams, and end by killing them, iii.
313 -- able to engender when two years old, iii. 314 -- wild dogs partake of
the disposition of the wolf, iii. 276 -- the wolf taken young is gentle only
while a cub; as it grows older, discovers its natural appetite of rapine and
cruelty, iii. 277 -- experiments prove neither wolf nor fox of the same nature
with the dog, but each a distinct species, iii. 298 to 300 -- France, Spain,
and Italy, much infested with them; England, Ireland, and Scotland, happily
free -- king Edgar first attempted to rid this kingdom, and in what manner,
iii. 319 -- Edward I. issued a mandate to Peter Corbet for the destruction of
them -- some quite black, some white all over -- found in Asia, Africa, and
America, iii. 320 -- in the East trained up for show, taught to dance and play
tricks; one thus educated sells for four or five hundred crowns -- in Lapland,
the wolf never attacks a reindeer when haltered -- wolves of North America
used in hunting, iii. 321, 322 -- caught in pitfalls; a wolf, a friar, and a
woman taken in one in the same night, iii. 319 Golden wolf, the Latin name for
the jackall, iii. 334 Wolf-fish, the anarbicas, a soft-finned apodal fish, its
description, vi. 311 Womb, history of the child in the womb, ii. 39 -- of the
hare divided in two, as a double organ, one side of which may be filled, while
the other remains empty, iv. 6 -- description of the false womb of the
oppossum, iv. 243, et seq. Woman, the body arrives at perfection sooner than in
men, ii. 79 -- the persons of women as complete at twenty as those of men at
thirty, ii. 80 -- the bones, cartilages, muscles, and other parts of the body,
softer than in men -- a woman of sixty has a better chance than a man of that
age to live to eighty -- women longer in growing old than men, ii. 199 -- the
shoulders narrower, and the neck proportionably longer than in men, ii. 107 --
after a catalogue of deformities, Linnaeus puts down the slender waists of the
women of Europe, by strait lacing, destroying their health, through a mistaken
notion of improving their beauty, ii. 243 -- less apt to become bald than men;
Mr. Buffon thinks they never become bald; there are too many instances of the
contrary, ii. 86 -- in the polar regions as deformed as the men, ii. 214 --
women of India described -- marry and consummate at eight, nine, and ten years
old, and have children at that age -- cease bearing before the age of thirty --
those of savage nations, in a great measure exempt from painful labors, ii.
224 -- some continue pregnant a month beyond the usual time -- those of Africa
deliver themselves, and are well a few hours after, ii. 47 -- remarkable
instance of the power of imagination upon the foetus, ii. 246 -- lower eyelids
drawn downwards when with child -- the corners of the mouth also -- then
likewise high shouldered -- circumstances under which the midwives call them
all mouth and eyes, ii. 104 -- in barbarous countries, the laborious duties of
life thrown upon the women, ii. 71, 121 -- the chief and only aim or an Asiatic
is possession of many women, ii. 72 -- instance, in our own country, of a fine
woman married to an eunuch, ii. 74 -- a principal employment of those of
Thibet, is reddening the teeth with herbs, and making their hair white, ii. 77
-- first impulse of savage nature confirms women's slavery; the next, of half
barbarous nations, appropriates their beauty; and that of the perfectly polite
engages their affections, ii. 122 Woods, in Britain, cut down by the Romans,
and for what reason, i. 286 Wood-cock, or cock of the wood, of the grouse kind,
places which this bird inhabits -- how distinguished from other birds of the
poultry kind -- the delicacy of its flesh -- its food and habitation -- amorous
desires first felt in spring, v. 200, 201 -- keeps to the place where he first
courts, and continues till the trees have their leaves, and the forest is in
bloom -- its cry, clapping of wings, and ridiculous postures in this season --
during which the females, attending his call, are impregnated; sportsmen use
this time to fire at them, and take many while thus tame, though at others it
is most timorous and watchful, V. 202, 203 -- the female much less than her
mate, and so unlike him in plumage, she might be mistaken for another species
-- number and size of the eggs -- she hatches them without the cock; and when
obliged to leave them, in quest of food, so covers them with moss or leaves, it
is difficult to find them -- she is then extremely tame and quiet -- keeps her
nest, though attempted to be driven away -- the young being hatched, they run
with agility after the mother, though scarcely disengaged from the shell, v.
203 -- their food ant's eggs and wild mountain berries -- older, they feed upon
tops of hither, and cones of pine trees -- are hardy -- the clutching time
over, the young males forsake the mother; keep together till spring, when the
first genial access sets them at variance for ever -- fight each other like
game-cocks, and easily fall a prey to the fowler, v. 204 Woodcock, bird of the
crane kind, its dimensions, vi. 23 -- food, vi. 25 -- is a bird of passage --
places where it is to be found, vi. 28 Woodchat, a rapacious bird, third kind
of the butcher-bird, v. 136 Wood-louse, its description -- has three varieties
-- where found -- how bred -- are of use in medicine, vii. 286, 287
Wood-pecker, of this bird are many kinds, and varieties in each, v. 249 --
general characteristics, v. 248 -- description of the green wood-pecker, or
wood-spite, called the rain-fowl in some parts -- feeds upon insects,
particularly those in hollow or rotting trees -- description of its tongue, the
instrument for killing and procuring food, v. 249 to 251 -- want that
intestine, which anatomists call the caecum, v. 249 -- stratagem used by them
to catch ants, v. 252 -- in what manner they make nests, and how delicate in
the choice -- number of eggs, v. 253 -- nests in warmer regions of Guinea and
Brasil, v. 254, 255 -- little wood pecker, called by the natives of Brasil
guiratemga, v. 255 Woodward, his essay toward a natural history, detail of it,
i. 26, et seq. Wool, the Spanish finer than ours; but in weight not comparable
to that of Lincoln or Warwickshire some Spanish wool required to work up with
it, iii. 44 -- of the pacos, most valuable, and formed into stuffs, not
inferior to silk; this manufacture a considerable branch of commerce in South
America, iv. 317 Worms, within the body of the caterpillar, devour its
entrails, without destroying its life, viii. 47 -- of different kinds infest
each species of fish, vi. 347 -- sea-worms make the shells of fishes their
food, vii. 16 Blind worm, of the serpent kind, its description -- lies torpid
all winter, vii. 221 Froth-worm, an insect in that sort of substance on the
surface of plants -- description of it, vii. 358 Worm-kind, general description
of the earth-worm, viii. 166 -- entirely without brain, but with the heart near
the head, viii. 168 -- in what manner taken, viii. 169 -- its eggs, viii. 168
-- nourishment, -- keeps life in separated parts, viii. 170 Wrasse, the labrus
of the prickly-finned thoracic kind -- description of this fish, vi. 307 Wren,
and golden crowned wren, slender billed birds of the sparrow kind, v. 314 --
willow-wren, a wandering bird of the sparrow-kind, v. 318 -- the singing bird
admired for the loudness of its note, compared to the smallness of its body, v.
335 Wrinkles, whence those of the body and face proceed, ii. 197 Wry-neck, or
cuckoo's attendant, a little bird, most active in the chase of the young
cuckoo, v. 266
X.
Xiphias, or the sword-fish, of the prickly-finned apodal kind, its
description, vi. 305
Y.
Young people sometimes cease growing at fourteen or fifteen, ii. 79
Z.
Zealand, inundations there, in which many villages were and remain overflowed,
i. 278 Zebra, the most beautiful, but wildest animal -- a native of the
southern parts of Africa -- nothing exceeds the delicate regularity of its
color -- description -- watchful and swift, ii. 390 -- its speed a proverb
among Spaniards and Portuguese -- stands better upon its legs than a horse --
in what countries found, ii. 396 -- the Portuguese pretend to have tamed, and
sent four from Africa to Lisbon, to draw the king's coach -- some sent to
Brasil, could not be tamed -- Merolla asserts, when tamed, they are still as
estimable for swiftness as beauty, ii. 397 -- their noise resembles the
confused barking of a mastiff dog -- in two, the author saw the skin below the
jaw upon the neck hung loose in a kind of dewlap -- they are easily fed; some
in England eat bread, meat, and tobacco -- the emperor of Japan made a present
of sixty thousand crowns value, for one received from a governor of Batavia,
ii. 398 -- the Great Mogul gave two thousand ducats for another -- African
ambassadors to the court of Constantinople, bring some with them, as presents
for the Grand Seignior, ii. 399 -- zebra and wild ass of a very different
species, ii. 376 Zebu, the Barbary cow, and the grunting or Siberian cow, are
but different races of the bison, iii. 23, 24, 32 Zeiran, name of the fourth
variety of gazelles by Mr. Buffon, iii. 73 Zembla, Nova, north wind reigns
there during winter, i. 346 -- a description of its inhabitants, ii. 213, et
seq. Zeus, the doree, of the prickly-finned thoracic kind, description of that
fish, vi. 309 Zibet, one of the two species of the civet, according to Mr.
Buffon -- distinction between them, iii. 389 Temperate zone, properly speaking
the theater of natural history, i. 14 Torrid zone, in the center the heat very
tolerable, in other places the cold painful -- temperature and advantages of
perpetual spring under it, i. 150 -- lightening there not fatal or dangerous,
i. 379 -- has the largest quadrupeds -- all fond of the water, iii. 28, 29
Zoophytes, name of vegetable nature endued with animal life, viii. 161 -- first
class of zoophytes, viii. 166 -- all the tribe continue to live in separate
parts; one animal by cuttings, divided into two distinct existences, sometimes
into a thousand, viii. 171 -- second class, viii. 174 Zorille, a stinkard, of
the weasel kind -- resembles the skink -- is smaller and more beautifully
colored, iii. 381
FINIS.

