OBSERVATIONS ON THE THREE FIRST VOLUMES OF THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY. IN A
FAMILIAR LETTER TO THE AUTHOR.

RIEN N'EST BEAU QUE LE VRAI; LE VRAI SEUL EST AIMABLE.

BOILEAU. LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. STOCKDALE, PICCADILLY; AND R. FAULDER, IN NEW
BOND-STREET MDCCLXXXII.

These OBSERVATIONS, printed in the size of Mr. WARTONS HISTORY, are extremely
proper to be bound up with that celebrated work, to which they will be found a
very useful APPENDIX.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
To the Revd. Mr. WARTON.
SIR,

YOU will have no reason to be either alarmed or offended at a mode of address,
which every reader has a right to adopt. The author of a book upon a subject
designed for and attractive of public attention gives a general challenge. If
his facts and opinions stand the test of a fair and candid enquiry, he is
entitled to universal patronage and approbation: if not, contempt and oblivion
should be his fate. The "History of English Poetry" stands high in public
estimation; the subject is equally curious, interesting, and abstruse: much,
very much, of its success is, undoubtedly, to be ascribed to the opinion
generally entertained of your veracity and care as a historian; and upon an
idea so universal, so satisfactory, and hitherto so undisturbed, it may seem
invidious not to have been content entirely to rely. I, however, Sir, am
somewhat too restless in my enquiries, too desirous of being able to judge for
myself, to be satisfied either with a writers reputation, or with the opinion
of the world; at least, when I have it in my power to learn how deservedly that
reputation has been acquired, or how justly that opinion is formed. In pursuit
of these objects, I have read and examined your great and important work with
some degree of attention and accuracy; and I now present you with the result of
my enquiries: the public disclosure of which will not, I flatter myself, either
to you, or your numerous readers, prove an unacceptable service. If, in some
few instances, I may be thought to have betrayed a warmth of expression, from
which reputation so high, abilities so uncommon, and a profession so sacred,
ought to have been wholely exempt, let me, once for all, observe, that, having
no other object in view, no other end to answer, than truth and justice, I
neither wish nor intend to consider you otherwise than as author of the work in
question. Personal motives I cannot possibly have been influenced by, and
utterly disavow. And were you able to falsify every charge I have here brought
against you, whatever might be your severity, I should kiss the rod with
resignation, and even pleasure: as, I assure you, the satisfaction I should
have experienced, in finding your work entirely free from error, would have
been infinitely beyond any I can be supposed to feel, in thus making myself the
public instrument of its detection.

VOL. I.
Preface

Page vi.

That "some perhaps will be of opinion, that these annals ought to have
commenced with a view of Saxon poetry," is a very natural and judicious
conjecture. "The legitimate illustration of that jejune and intricate subject,"
would undoubtedly "have doubled 'your' labor," and required, I fear, a more
profound and extensive erudition, as well as a more penetrating judgment, than
were, perhaps, necessary for the era whence you have thought proper to deduce
this important history. "That the Saxon language is familiar only to a few
learned antiquaries, that our Saxon poems are little more than religious
rhapsodies, and that scarce any compositions remain marked with the native
images of that people in their pagan state It may seem a very extraordinary
idea in a Christian minister, and who is not only the historian of poets, but a
poet hisself, that these people could not have a poetical genius, because they
were not pagans; and that religion and poetry are incompatible. The notion,
however strange, may yet in some degree be just: The Saxons, like many other
nations, really seem to have got very little "by the swop."
, we will readyly allow; because, admitting the positions to be true, they
prove nothing; they are perfectly harmless: But, "that the Saxon poetry has NO
CONNECTION with the nature and purpose of 'your' PRESENT UNDERTAKING," is an
assertion, one may safely venture to say, as new as it is ill-grounded, and
full of mischief. Though the great revolution produced by the Norman invaders
effected "that signal change in our policy, constitution, and public manners,"
which has in its consequences "reached modern times," yet neither the Saxon
people nor the Saxon tongue was thereby eradicated. You, Sir, have sometimes
been a blographer; and did you ever find it necessary to commence the story of
your hero at the 15th or 16th year of his age, and to assert that the time of
his birth and infancy had no connection with the story of his life, because,
forsooth, he was become a very different person when grown up and sent to
college, from what he was when born, breeched, and sent to school? And yet one
may well doubt, whether such an apology would not have answered your purpose
just as effectually in that case, as your reason for declining to enter upon
the state of the Saxon poetry does in this. The truth is, that the origin and
fundamental principles, as well of our language as of our poetry, are to be
sought for among the remains of the Saxon literature You admit this by the very
first page of your history; you doubtless perceived your inconsistency, though
you did not, I suppose, expect that any of your readers would do so.
; and he who shall tell us that the English and Saxon languages have not sort
of connection with each other, is either deceived hisself, or finds it his
interest to deceive others, -- by sheltering his own ignorance or inactivity
under a formidable and labored show of difficulty and uselessness, equally
visionary, delusive, and pernicious.

P. viii.

Whether you have gratifyed "the reader of taste," by your exertions on this
subject, I know not; but of this I am confident, that "the antiquarian" will
have greater reason to be dissatisfyed with being perplexed or misled, than to
thank you for having engaged in a task for which it will appear you have been
so little qualifyed.

I shall pass by the two dissertations which precede your history without
observation You have somewhere observed, that we have a kind of malicious
pleasure in detecting the secret resources and petty thefts of a great writer;
and the remark is just and natural, with respect to the pleasure; which does
not, I trust, so much result from malice, as from a secret regard to truth, and
an indignant warmth at seeing the daw strut abroad in his stolen plumes.
Whatever may be the cause, I shall in the course of this enquiry have many
opportunities or proving the justice of the observation. And, firstly, you will
be pleased to take notice, that the greatest and best part of your note (t)
(Dis. I. sign. a. 4. b.) in which you, with an equal parade of ingenuity and
learning, account for an interpolation, by Geoffrey of Monmouth, into his
translation of the British history, has been found to be almost literally
borrowed from Mr. Carts preface to the first vol. of his History of England. I
have likewise some little reason to suppose, though I do not think worth my
while to prove, that you owe more obligation to Sheltons translation of Wottons
View of Dr. Hickeses Thesaurus, than to the Thesaurus itsself.
; not that I think them altogether just and proper, but because I find that a
strict examination would require greater leisure, and more intense application,
as well as a more frequent reference to the numerous and uncommon books there
quoted (many of which I have, by the way, much reason to suspect you never
consulted, nor even ever saw) than I am at present either willing or able to
devote to it. I do not, at the same time, wish to detract from whatever merit
you may have in this ingenious structure: I only desire the reader to be
particularly cautious and distrustful, as he wanders over these extensive
regions of FABLE and ROMANCE. One may, however, venture to assert, that, let
your facts and reasonings in the first of these dissertations be ever so just,
yet will they by no means prove any thing like what you produce them for, --
the introduction of romantic fiction into Europe; which is rather to be sought
for in the history of the Gauls, or other Celtic nations, who were settled in
Europe some thousand years before you suppose the Goths to have arrived in this
part of the world, and had doubtless "a very sufficient stock of lies of their
own growth Tyrwhitt versus Warburton. Supplement to Shakspeare, i. 373.
," without being beholden to Asiatic adventurers.

I shall not give myself the trouble to minute every inaccuracy I might
discover in the citations you have introduced from the old metrical legends,
between your 7th and 26th page: I take it for granted they are just as correct
as I shall prove others to be, which you have given from MSS. in the Cotton and
Harleian libraries; many of which, as one may easyly perceive, by your method
of quoting, referring to, or registering them, you have certainly never seen.

P. 26.

One cannot help taking notice of your frequent forewardness in determining the
age of poetical compositions, or the MSS. which contain them. In this page you
produce a love-song, the oldest you can discover, which you "would place before
or about the year 1200." This you cite from a MS. appearing, as you elsewhere
P. 28.
tell us, to be of the handwriting of the reign of king Edward the first: but
an Elegy upon his DEATH, which you have printed, in another place P. 103.
, from this very MS. might have served to show you the absurdity of dating it
in his LIFETIME. The truth is, the book evidently appears to have been written
in the reign of his son and successor; and there is not the least reason for
concluding any poem in it to be much older than the year 1300.

The Revd. Dr. Percy (now lord bishop of Dromore), whose knowledge in these
matters seems pretty much upon a level with your own, has brought its age down
so low as the reign of king Richard II. Relics of Ancient Poetry, ii. 3.


I cannot, willingly, dismiss this same love-song, without giving a specimen or
two of the extreme correctness with which it is printed, and the extreme
propriety with which it is explained.

"With lokkes lefliche and long." Lefliche, you say, is "lively;" and a most
curious explanation to be sure it is! The lively locks of a young lady!
Charming creature! she must have been a perfect Medusa! But, possibly, you
mistook lokkes for looks; and then we have the lively and long looks of the
said fair one! If this famous history of yours should have the great and
unmerited good fortune to come to a second edition, you will do well to
subtract one fault, by correcting lively to lovely; and another, by writing
lure lumes instead of bire limbs: for though old poetry may be the same thing
to you, sense or nonsense, it may not be so to every one who is tempted to look
into your book. The great blank, a few lines further, you may fill up with the
little word was: but, indeed, you would do much better to get a fresh
transcript, as there are fifty other mistakes in the copy you have printed: and
all the rest of the extracts from this and every other MS. throughout the
volume, and indeed the whole work, are in the same predicament. It would,
moreover, be as well, not to call the verses beginning "Hyrdmen [hem] hatieth
ant vch mones hyne," a different ballad from that on the lawyers; as, had you
inspected the MS. instead of the catalogue, you would have found both to be one
and the same piece.

P. 43, 44, 45, 46.

We are here favored with a satirical ballad upon Richard king of the Romans,
brother to our Henry III. preserved in the above MS. which you, in a note, tell
us you "had transcribed from the British Museum, and written the explanations
upon, BEFORE 'you' knew that it was printed in the SECOND [FIRST] edition of
Doctor Percy's Ballads." -- Now, Mr. Warton, listen to me for a single moment,
and "mark how a plain tale shall put you down." Dr. (now Bp.) Percy, in
printing this song, has taken some liberties with the orthography and language
(and where is the piece with which he has not taken such liberties?) in
particular, he has altered the word cop "Sire Simond de Montfort has suore by
is cop," i. e. cap or head. Thus, in the ancient Erench romance of Girart de
Vienne, MS.

TH mon cap did. G. men uoil gardar.


, which he did not understand, to fot, which, it is to be supposed, he did. In
this alteration, and indeed throughout the whole poem, YOU, Mr. Warton, have
followed him with a most literal and servile exactness. Still, however, you
might have escaped undetected, and have pilfered "your ingenious friend and
fellow laborer" with safety; but, unluckyly, his lordships accuracy, being
much of a piece with your own, suffered him to omit a complete stanza; which
could not possibly have eluded the observation of a second copyist: but I look
in vain for it in YOUR (different) transcript. However, as it may be some small
consolation to you in this unfortunate dilemma, I will here give it you.

Be the luef be the loht sire edward,
You shall ride sporeles o thy lyard.
All the ryhte way to douere ward
Shall thou never more break foreward
And that reweth sore.
Edward thou dudest ase a shreward
For soke thyn emes lore.
Richard etc.
This omission of the ingenious prelate is the more astonishing, not only as
the verse immediately follows what he has copyed, but because Mr. Wanley says,
in his catalogue, that the song expressly mentions prince Edward, which it
only does in this verse At p. 103, is another poem [the Elegy on Ed. I.] from
the Relics; but there too it escaped you, till just before the work went to
the press, that the Dr. had printed it. Credat Judaeus Apella; non ego.
.

I shall make no remark on the obvious wonder of your forgetting the principal
contents of a book, from which you are continually quoting passages -- as your
own; a favor, indeed, that many writers have to acknowledge, beside his
lordship of Dromore.

P. 52.

"The king and is conseil radde the stones for to fette." Radde you boldly say
is Rode. Writers who want in knowledge should abound in care. Had you read three
lines further, you would have discovered that the king and his council did NOT
ride. -- It means advised.

P. 53.

No one, I sincerely believe, except yourself, could have supposed, for a
moment, that the name of HENGIST deserved the slightest attention, in giving
the etymology of the word STONEHENGE: -- than which nothing can be more simple
and apparent; as it is communicated by the word itsself: (...) hanging stone.

P. 58.

"In the reign of Henry the sixth, we find a ballad stuck on the gates of the
royal palace.... This piece is preserved in the Ashmolean museum."

It is no ballad; and the reference would have been just as easy, and much more
useful, to Hearnes HEMINGI CHARTULARIUM, p. 663. Whence, I dare lay my life,
you had your information.

P. 67.

"What manner schap with me so ferd."

Why, Lay? Fared.

"Of elde avenaunt."

Not, "I was then young and beautiful," but -- of a fit age.

It may not be improper, once for all, to warn the reader, that you interpret
every where at random; and not because you perfectly understand, but because
you are entirely ignorant of, the word you pretend to explain. I must, however,
do you the justice to except a variety of words, to which you have affixed the
proper meanings, where the merest schoolboy could not have been at a loss for
them: and for the multitude of really difficult ones which you have left
untouched, your readers owe you infinite obligations.

P. 68.

Poor old Cotgrave is here attacked for, what you call, absurdly interpreting
mangoneau ( magnel in your text) an old-fashioned sling. You, indeed, say, "it
is a catapult or battering ram I observe, that this ingenious explication is,
with many other blunders, of greater and less consequence, afterward directed
to be destroyed. You should, however, have destroyed it yourself. It would not,
surely, be a sufficient atonement for the impudence or ignorance of a writer,
whose work was one continued mistake, to direct his readers to -- dele the
whole. You will not, however, have many similar instances of hardship to
complain of.
." But, pray, Mr. Warton, who told you so? or where did you learn that a
catapult was the same thing as a battering ram? Cotgrave undoubtedly knew a
thousand million times more of the matter than you can do: and, to prove that
you know nothing at all about it, let me entreat you to read your own text; you
will there find that the magnels were to be used by people UPON the wall,
against those who came to assail it. Was that the place and use of a battering
ram? The very passage shows Cotgrave to be right: and his explanation is
further confirmed by a line at p. 72, where, though the word magneles is joined
with slinges, and evidently signifies something of the same nature, you have
the confidence to refer the reader to the above nonsense at p. 68.

P. 75.

"Danz Robert of Meltone."

"Sir Robert of Malton. It appears from hence, that he was born at Malton in
Lincolnshire." And why not at Malton in Yorkshire? or why, indeed, at any
Malton? There are still places called Melton. But do you suppose, that when a
person is designed of such a place, it is always an evidence he was born at it?

P. 79.

" Vuel thing;" "well, good." P. 82. " Vuel thing;" "Vile."

Such sensible people, Mr. Warton, as yourself, generally take care to be very
consistent. Is a good thing a vile one?

P. 110.

"Before these expeditions into the East became fashionable, the principal and
leading subjects of the old fablers were the achievements of king Arthur with
his knights of the round table, and of Charlemagne with his twelve peers. But
in the romances written after the holy war, a new set of champions, of
conquests and of countries, were introduced. Trebizonde took place of
Rouncevalles, and Godfrey of Bulloigne, Solomon, Nouraddin, the caliphs, the
souldans, and the cities of Egypt and Syria, became the favorite topics."

And now, Mr. Warton, after this very sublime Eastern flight, let me ask, for I
dare say many of your readers would be glad to know, what time you are pleased
to call the fashionable era of the Crusade. Was it when Godfrey captured
Jerusalem in 1099? or when Richard I. planted the English standard upon the
walls of Acon in 1191? If the first, you will, I am afraid, be at a loss to
produce a single romance upon the subject of king Arthur, of Charlemagne, or of
Roncesvalles. If the second, then I am to enquire where a romance is to be
found, any way near that age, or, indeed, of any other, which treats of
Trebizond, independent of the history of Charlemagne? and, excepting, perhaps,
a book or two of the acts of Godfrey and Baldwin, where are these favorite
romances of Solomon, Nouraddin, the caliphs, the soldans, Egypt, and Syria,
which cut such a pompous figure in the above extract? Shall I likewise give you
the trouble to recollect your authority for making the whole body of the
troubadours of Provence take up arms, and follow their barons, "in prodigious
multitudes," to the conquest of Jerusalem? That some few of these poets, in the
service and courts of princes, should be permitted to accompany their lords to
the crusade, and that others, of inferior rank, might enter into and mix with
the army, may be, and I fancy is, very true: but that a single province should,
at that or any other time, contain such prodigious multitudes of itinerant
minstrels, is an assertion as hypothetic and insupportable, as it is incredible
and absurd. It will, moreover, appear, that the Provencal troubadours were then
( i. e. about the latter crusade, for you fix upon neither) and for some time
after, a respectable and superior description of men.

P. 111.

"The elder Spanish romances have professedly more Arabian allusions than any
other." -- Will you, Mr. Warton, do us the favor to name a single one of those
elder Spanish romances, with any Arabian allusion? I know you cannot. Cervantes
has, indeed, pretended that the author of Don Quixote was an Arabian. And any
person acquainted with the romantic books published about his own time Historia
de Don Rodrigo, 1592, 1600, 4 to. Historia de las guerras civiles de Granada,
1604, etc.
will see the force and propriety of this piece of satyr. Those critics, and
we know well enough who they are, that supposed Spain to have learned the art
of romance-writing from the Arabians, and to have afterward communicated it to
the rest of Europe, were, unfortunately, ignorant that this species of
composition was every where cultivated, and had been so for centuries, before
it is known to have even existed in Spain. To prove that the Spaniards imitated
the Moors (and they have not a single romance (at least what WE mean by
romance) to be given in evidence upon the occasion) it should first be made
appear, from better authority than the whimsical reveries of self-conceited
hypothetics, that those Arabians had any such performances among them. Huet
does not seem to favor any such system: he uses the word romance with the
greatest propriety: and the sophistry and ignorance of that (would-have-been)
universal critic (and there was never wanting either a fool to think, or a
parasite to call him so) who undertook and pretended to correct him, has been
sufficiently exposed and chastised by one very well acquainted with the merits
of both Supplement to Shakspeare, i. 373.
.

P. 165.

The Sowdan of Damascus is represented in the text as riding with great
violence to attack king Richard; and the romance says, "A FAUCON BROAD in hand
he bare,
"For he thought he would their
"Have slain Richard with treasowne."
This faucon broad you most sagaciously interpret to be a BIRD! wonderful
genius! -- What had not the king to dread from an enemy so terribly accoutered!
"The Sultan (continues this your admirable exposition) is represented as
meeting Richard with a hawk on his fist, to show indifference, or a contempt
for his adversary; and that he came rather prepared for the CHASE than the
COMBAT." And so you go on, through a whole page, and a long note, to prove that
other great men formerly carried hawks on their fist, but never, as you very
ingeniously conclude, going to battle: and yet the Sultan is here in the midst
of an engagement, and riding full speed to assail his antagonist, with a
FAULCON in (not on) his hand, instead of a SABRE! -- Though such unparalleled
ignorance, such matchless effrontery, is not, Mr. Warton, in my humble opinion,
worthy of any thing but castigation or contempt, yet, should there be a single
person, beside yourself, who can mistake the meaning of so plain, so obvious a
passage (which I much suspect to have been corrupted in coming through your
hands) I shall beg leave to inform him, that a FAUCON BROAD is nothing more or
less than a BROAD FAUCHION.

P. 188.

"With ffoxes tails money about."

"In many knots." Clearly, with many foxes tails about him.

P. 189.

I stop here to acquaint you, that ROBERT LE DIABLE is a totally different
personage from ROBERT OF CICYLE. I shall have a little more to say to you on
your intimacy with these two gentlemen by and by.

P. 198.

Pray, Mr. Warton, shall I take the liberty to ask you, in what "ROMANTIC
HISTORY OF THE PALADINS" we shall find "William Ferrabras and his brethren,
sons of Tancred the Norman, [who] acquired the signories of Apulia and
Calabria, about the year 1230!"

P. 200.

"It is well known that anciently England LADIES were sheriffs of counties."
This is a circumstance of which you, who seem to know so many strange things,
may be perfectly satisfied. Some of your readers, though, I imagine, would have
been equally obliged to you, if you had condescended to produce an instance or
two of the fact: -- but that, I am afraid, would have been somewhat difficult
to compass The hereditary sheriffdom of Westmoreland has been, and may still
be, in a female: and to this, though it be nothing to the purpose, you may,
perhaps, mean to allude.


P. 205.

"The metrical romance, entitled, La [Le] Mort Arthure...is supposed by the
learned and accurate Wanley to be a translation from the French: who adds, that
it is not perhaps older than the times of Henry the seventh. But as it abounds
with many Saxon words, and SEEMS to be quoted in Sir Bevys, I have given it a
place here That is, before or about the time of king Edward II.
."

The learning and accuracy of Mr. Wanley had not, however, it should seem, the
power to convince you that a poem no older than the reign of Henry VII. could
not possibly belong to that of Edward II. But it often, indeed, suits ones
purpose best to be ignorant. Mr. Wanley says, the writer of this romance "uses
many Saxon or obsolete words:" and Dr. Percy observes, that it SEEMS to be
quoted in Sir Bevis, (your own expression!) which is as unlikely as it is
untrue. However, to settle all differences upon the subject (and you had
certainly, Mr. Warton, on these puzzling occasions, better suffer yourself to
be guided by so good a judge as Mr. Wanley, than, being blind yourselt, lead
your blind readers into the ditch) I can assure you, that this same romance
(and one might have almost guessed it by the title) is neither more nor less
than a good part of CAXTONS Prose Book reduced into meter; and neither is, nor
possibly can be, older than the reign of Henry the seventh.

P. 208.

"Chaucer mentions in Sir Topaz, among others, the romantic poems of SIR
BLANDAMOURE, Sir Libeaux, and Sir Ippotis. Of the former, I find nothing more
than the name occurring in SIR LIBEAUX." And do you, Mr. Warton, really find
the name there? Dr. Percy, indeed, says that the word ( Blandamoure, 1 suppose)
occurs in LIBEAUX; and very modestly observes, "that it is possible Chaucers
memory deceived him!" But you, Mr. Warton, will be pleased to mark: 1. that
Chaucer does NOT mention SIR BLANDAMOURE (the title is conferred by yourself
You have, on this occasion, I see, been very liberal of your knightly favors:
-- having bestowed the same honor upon poor master Ypotis. It would not be
amiss to christen it -- the Order of Ignorance.
); he only names Sir Libeaus and Pleindamoure. And, 2. I am credibly informed,
that no such name as either Blandamoure or Pleindamoure is to be found in
Lybeaus: so that, it is probable, either your own eyes, or (as I rather
suppose) those of your right reverend and learned friend, have seen the thing
which was not.

"Among Tanners manuscripts (you say) we have the Wedding of Sir Gawain, Numb.
455. Bibl. Bodl." But are you sure, Mr. Warton, that this reference is
accurate: -- there was, I am well assured, no such thing in the article when it
was, not long since, inspected for this very purpose.

You say, you think you "have somewhere seen a romance in verse, entitled, The
Turk and Gawaine." The bishop of Dromore says he has it in his FOLIO MS. Did
you ever SEE THAT?

P. 216.

"I should swithe don my lord king to wit."

Thus ingeniously explained: "I should make haste my lord the king to know,"
instead of, I should quickly do him to wit, i. e. let him know.

P. 219.

"Our brother we mow him clepe well".

"WELL, i. e. SOMETIMES." O rare T. W.!

P. 222.

" Pelles, skins." Ignorance! velvet mantles, palls.

P. 236.

"Fitz-Stephen mentions, at the end of his tract, "Imperatricem Matildem,
Henricum tertium, et beatum Thomam. etc." p. 483." Upon which you make the
following profound and sagacious remark: "Henry the third did not accede till
the year 1216. Perhaps he (Fitz-Stephen) implied futurum regem tertium." You
conclude then, do doubt, that he spoke by the spirit of prophecy; for this
Henry the third was not born till 1207, thirty-five years after Beckets
assassination, and sometime, most probably, after Fitz-Stephens death. But I
will, as I have often done, and shall, throughout my letter, have frequent
occasion to do, give you a little information upon this subject, of which you
seem very much in need.

1. You do not (at least did not) understand the passage you have here
imperfectly quoted, or you must have perceived that the author only mentions
these three great personages in this place, because they were born in LONDON.
2. Henry the third (who "acceded in 1216") as I think you must have been some
time or other told, was born at WINCHESTER; which place, for aught I know,
might likewise have the honor of giving birth to yourself. 3. Fitz-Stephen is
not speaking of a king in futuro, but of one in esse, namely, Henry the
younger, son to Henry II. and grandson to the empress Matilda, who was crowned
king in the lifetime of his father, and is expressly styled HENRICUS TERTIUS,
by Matthew Paris, William of Newbury, and several others of our early
historians. -- Particulars known to any person; but of which I do not at all
wonder that YOU should be ignorant, or upon which, that you should write; as
you seem to be no better acquainted with any one point you have handled in the
whole course of your blundering work.

P. 256. -- 265.

This rubbish Long extracts from the Prick of Conscience; the most stupid
miserable stuff that the historian could any where discover; and of which no
person can possibly read three lines.
fills up rarely, Mr. Warton! we shall soon make a volume!

P. 306, note (y).

The absurdity of the argument against ecclesiastical establishments will not
be readyly perceived by any but a thorough-bred Oxonian tory-rory
High-churchman.

P. 307.

The folly and injustice of your censure on Wickliffe, that his attacks on the
superstitions of his age proceeded from resentment, might have been avoided,
had you known when he begun to write, and when he was ejected from his
wardenship; particulars which you might easyly have learned from the Biographia
Britannica.

P. 309.

I should be glad to know from what authority, or intrinsic or extrinsic
evidence, you infer, that the romance of Alexander, quoted in this page, was
written in imitation of the style and manner of Piers Plowman; which it
certainly is not. Indeed, it rather seems to be a much earlyer composition.
There is, I can assure you, more reason against LONGLANDS title to the
authorship of Piers Plowman than you are aware of.

P. 388.

"Our author [ i. e. Chaucer, in his Troilus and Cresseida] from his excessive
fondness for Statius, has been guilty of a, very diverting double anachronism."

I wish not to interrupt the merryment occasioned by this notable discovery: --
But, after you have sufficiently enjoyed your laugh, -- let me ask you, where
this same diverting double anachronism exists -- out of your own imagination,
-- fertile enough, perhaps, in creations of this kind. Why might not Cressid be
represented by Chaucer as reading the STORY OF THEBES? Was the destruction of
that city subsequent to the siege of Troy? And, admitting that Chaucer derived
all his own knowledge from the THEBAID, does CASSANDRA ever mention the name of
STATIUS?

P. 412.

You are here pleased to tell, us, that "AMADIS DE GAUL" had a sword which
baffled the force of enchantments; and refer to Don Quixote as your authority:
but you are continually involving yourself in some unfortunate dilemma. For, in
the 1st place, Amadis de Gaul had NOT such a sword: and, 2dly, Don Quixote does
NOT say he HAD. He, indeed, speaks of the sword which belonged to " Amadis,
quando se llamava, el Cavallero de la ardiente espada P. 1. l. 3. c. 4.
," when he called himself, the Knight of the burning sword: and, if you had
been in the least degree acquainted with the matter, you would have known that
it is not to AMADIS DE GAUL, but to AMADIS OF GREECE, he here alludes: which
last character is known by this very title; and whose sword had actually the
qualities which Cervantes ascribes to it.

P. 415.

"Cervantes mentions a horse of wood -- made by Merlin, for Peter of Provence;
with which that valorous knight carried off the fair Magalona. From what
romance Cervantes took this I do not recollect."

It is not very surprising that you should forget what you never knew: but, to
assist your memory, I will inform you of three things, no one of which I dare
believe you are at present in the least acquainted with. 1. The romance alluded
to by Cervantes is entitled, "La Historia de la linda Magalona hija del rey de
Napoles y de Pierres de Provenca," printed at Seville, 1533, and 1542, 4 to.
and is a translation from a much more ancient and very celebrated French
romance, under a similar title. 2. The story of the wooden horse, with the pin
in its head, is also to be found in another old Spanish romance (likewise from
the French) entitled, "La Historia del cavallero Clamades y de la linda
Clarmonda," printed at Burgos, 1521, in 4 to. 3. The original tale is in the
Arabian Nights Entertainments See "The story of the Enchanted Horse," vol. iv.
p. 182.



P. 416.

"The story of Patient Grisilde was the invention of Boccacio." Hardyly and
boldly asserted. -- Blind Bayard never hesitates at a leap. From the
circumstance of there being every reason to conclude that Boccace was NOT the
author of this story, you very rationally conclude he WAS. In the year 1373
(and not 1374) the Decameron fell into the hands of Petrarch, who tells
Boccace, in a letter, he was so much affected with this tale, that he had
translated it into Latin; adding, that it had always pleased him when he had
heard it many years before See Mr. Tyrwhitts Chaucer, iv. 157.
; a sufficient proof that Boccace was not the author. And it would, indeed,
appear very strange, if Petrarch had not paid his friend some compliment upon
the invention of so interesting a story, if he had not been fully apprised that
it was not HIS. Besides, it is well enough known that this is far from being
the only tale in the Decameron, of which Boccace was not the inventor. The
fable of Chaucers interview with Petrarch having been justly exploded and given
up by every other person, YOU are now "inclined to think that he (Chaucer) was
one of those friends to whom Petrarch used to relate it ( i. e. the story of
Grisilde) at Padua;" and "this," you say, "seems sufficiently pointed out in
the words of the prologue;" because the Clerk of Oxenford, who tells the story,
there says, that HE "lernid it at 'Padow of this worthy clerk." A most
convincing and satisfactory circumstance truly! But Petrarch does not inform
us that he ever used to relate the story to his friends at Padua, or anywhere
else: he only says, he had shown his translation of it to one of them: and
from this version, which would, most probably, be longer and more
circumstantial than Boccacios (and if you think proper, you have it in your
power to compare them) there can be little doubt that Chaucer took the story,
believing it to be Petrarchs own, and knowing it was not Boccacios.

P. 417.

"There is a curious mixture in CHAUCERS balade to king Henry IV. where
Alexander, Hector, Julius Caesar, Judas Maccabeus, David, Joshua, Charlemagne,
Godfrey of Bulloign, and king Arthur, are all thrown together as ancient
heroes. v. 281, seq."

And pray, Sir, under your good favor, where is the great curiosity of placing
the NINE WORTHIES in their proper order? Your learning just enabled you to
discover, that les neuf preux meant the nine worthies; it was not sufficient to
inform you who they were. But now, Mr. Warton, since you are so fond of
pointing out curiosities, what do you think of the curiosity of JOHN GOWERS
balade to Henry IV. being written by CHAUCER?

P. 420.

"Well sikerer was his crowing in his loge,
"Than was a clock, or abbey horologe."
Sikerer, "clearer." Nonsense! Surer, more exact.

P. 427.

"A broche she bare upon her low collere,
"As broad as is the bosse of a boklere,"
What do you mean by explaining broche a JEWEL? A precious stone as broad as
the boss of a shield! A very common ornament, no doubt. -- It was her
breast-buckle.

P. 429.

"It is remarkable," you say, "that Wickliffe translates, Luc. i. 21! [i. 15.]
"He schal not drink wyn ne sydyr!" Is this last word in any printed or MS.
copy of Wickliffes testament; or is it an interpolation of your own? I only
ask, because a very ancient MS. of it, which has been lately consulted for the
purpose, reads "wine and cyser," (" vinum et siceram;" OXFORD ALE.) And as that
seems to be the true word, your quotation of the passage makes nothing to the
purpose for which you produce it.

VOL. II.
P. 5.

It would have been a curious, though, I should be apt to imagine, a somewhat
difficult argument, to have endeavored to prove how Gowers mentioning a great
number of stones, "vegetable, mineral, and animal," "abundantly confirms" Dr.
Warburtons explication of Falstaffes "TWO stones:" which passage, you very
modestly tell us, "the rest of the commentators do not seem to have
understood;" though, in reality, as "the rest of the commentators" would tell
you, you do not understand it yourself.

P. 8.

I will here, with your good leave, transcribe a very curious note from the
foot of this page.

"I have mentioned a Latin romance of Alexander's life, as printed by Frederick
Corsellis, about 1468. supr. vol. i. p. 131. [where you tell us it is "without
date."] On examination, that impression is said to be finished December. 17,
1468. Unluckily, the seventeenth day of December was a Sunday that year. A
manifest proof that the name of Corsellis was forged."

And upon this correction and inevitable conclusion, I shall beg leave to
hazard a couple of insignificant remarks. The first is, I much doubt whether
there be any such book as you refer to, appearing or pretending to be printed
by Corsellis in the above year; because, if there be, and we can only get rid
of your "manifest proof," I think its existence will go a great way to
establish not only the identity of the man, but his residence and practice at
Oxford in that very early period: a circumstance so much to the credit of Alma
Matter, that I am surprised one of her old fostered children should have so
readyly given it up, on the slight ground of a printers devil finishing a book
upon a Sunday!

But are you certain, Mr. Warton, that the 17th day of December. 1468 was a
Sunday? Because I have (and this is my 2d remark) some reason to believe that
it was not; and I Will tell you why: -- It was a SATURDAY; the last day of the
week; the most likely of all others for the finishing of a laborious work: "a
manifest proof that the name of Corsellis was NOT forged." For, surely, "the
collusion holds good in the exchange." -- The Sunday letter for this part of
the year, which was leap year (and I appeal to every one capable of calculating
it) was B. Sunday must, therefore, necessaryly fall upon the EIGHTEENTH day of
the above month; as any parish-clerk is able to inform you. How prudent, Mr.
Warton, you see it is, always to establish your premises upon a sure
foundation, before you venture to draw a conclusion which may, in the end,
prove the overthrow of its creator.

P. 42.

-- "men know well inowe
"That combre-world that thou [Death] my master slow."
(Note a.) "He calls death the encumbrance of the world." Ridiculous! It is the
MEN who encumber the world: fruges consumere nati.

P. 46.

"He [Whethamstede] expended upwards of one hundred and TWENTY pounds." Hearne,
in the place quoted Otterb. i. cxxiii.
, has "ultra summa^ centu^ ql qa ginta librar." Is that a hundred and TWENTY?

P. 102.

The extract from Sir Launfal, for which you are obliged to your very accurate
and faithful friend and coadjutor, Dr. Thomas Percy (now lord bishop of
Dromore) is in the same miserable state of incorrectness as all your other
transcripts from MSS. But why should you regard what you do not understand? I
will, 1st, give you an instance that it is incorrect; and, 2dly, an instance
that you do not understand it.

1. Instead of " Le douty artours dawes," the MS. reads " Be (i. e. by, in)
douty artours dawes."

2. "Of a ley that was ysette."

Ley you interpret Liege; as if it alluded to Launfals character or situation;
whereas it is simply a Lay (or song) that was so called.

I could adduce five hundred such instances, if I chose. I may hereafter take
some notice of your absurd whim of ascribing "a set of French romances" to
"some Armorican bard;" as well as of the familiar and confident manner in which
you affect to speak of the poets of Britany; of whose writings you never saw a
line, nor can you tell where there is one to be found; and for whose history
you know not where to look.

P. 103.

You think you "have seen some evidence to prove that Chestre was author of the
Earl of Toulouse." You THINK so! and expect, I suppose, that your dreams are to
pass upon your readers for fact and history? you never could see any such
evidence; you never did see it.

P. 117.

I only observe, that the Gal, which you have here so very ingeniously
converted into Sal, and thence into Salisbury, is foisted in by yourself,
without the least authority. This Chateau du Gast, or Gat, is indeed said to
be near Salisbury, but that is a sufficient proof it was not meant to be the
same place. You should have proved that the romance of Lancelot had existed in
Latin, before you mentioned it as a translation from that tongue.

P. 125.

"John Major mentions the beginning of some of his [i. e. James I. of
Scotlands] other poems, viz. "Yas sen, etc." and "at Beltayn, etc." Both these
poems SEEM to be written on his wife." And why do they SEEM so? Did you ever
see them? Can you discover so much from the four words and two et ceteras you
have printed? or does Major, or any one else who knew them, say aught to favor
so idle, and, to my knowledge, false a notion?

P. 126.

"The decisive battle of SHREWSBURY, fought against the SCOTS."

Where, in the name of all that is wonderful and absurd, could you possibly
meet with this precious piece of information? In the same authority, no doubt,
whence you learned that the EMPEROR was taken prisoner by the FRENCH KING, at
the siege of PAVIA Supplement to Shakspeare, ii. 541.
. You must either, Mr. Warton, deal in very strange histories, or else you are
very unmindful of what you read, or careless of what you say. And, indeed, I
cannot but think, if that good and wholesome discipline, which the name of
MILTON may probably call to your remembrance, were still in use at Trinity
College, the more than childish ignorance of a certain near friend of yours
would hardly escape without experiencing its salutary effects.

P. 127.

If you had looked further into John Hardings Chronicle, than merely to pick
out a specimen of his poetical frigidity, you might have found reason to allow,
with some truth, "that both his prose and poetry are equally useful;" as his
book contains many curious and important historical records, and a relation of
numerous interesting facts, in some of which he was a performer, to others an
eyewitness, not to be found in any other of our old writers: and, surely, you
are not so absurd as to imagine, that the veracity of his narrative is
impeached by the flatness of his verse. But, indeed, I am not at all surprised
at the disregard you show for authentic history, after giving us such signal
proofs how little you are acquainted with it.

P. 134.

"John Scogan is commonly supposed to have been a cotemporary of Chaucer, but
this is a mistake. He was educated at Oriel college in Oxford; and being an
excellent mimic, and of great pleasantry in conversation, became the favorite
buffoon of the court of Edward the fourth, in which he passed the greatest part
of his life." You could scarcely have give the gentleman a more particular
description, if you had enjoyed the pleasure of a tete-a-tete with him. But
where is your authority for it? Marry, in "SCOGGINS JESTS;" an admirable
source, truly, to draw the history of a man's life from. So may the lives of
Foot, Garrick, and Sir John Fielding, be compiled, by some future Warton, from
the jest-books extant under their respective names. But let us examine the
account. This Scogan, or Scoggin, it seems was a buffoon in the court of Edward
the fourth: how, then, came Falstaff to break his head, "at the court gate,
when he was a crack not thus high;" this was in John of Gaunts time, when Jack
"was page to Thomas Mowbray, duke of Norfolk 2d pt. of Hen. IV. a. iii. sc. 1.
" O! this no doubt, you will say, is Shakspeares own anachronism. Ben Jonson,
however, who was as likely to know the fact as you are, expressly tells us that
Scogan was -- a fine gentleman, and a master of arts
Of HENRY THE FOURTHS times, that made disguises
For the kings sons, and writ in ballad royal
Daintily well Fortunate Isles, vol. vi. p. 292. Consult also Tyrwhitts
Chaucer, V. xv. xix.
.
And this seems to be true; for we have a moral balade royal from "Scogan, unto
the lords and gentlemen of the kings house," and which must, as you observe,
have been written before the year 1447 (meaning, I suppose, 1412) in his old
age, and printed, as you yourself tell us, by Caxton, who was, doubtless,
sufficiently acquainted with his identity and character; and there is,
likewise, another from Chaucer to him. So that, notwithstanding any doubt or
uncertainty you may have upon the authenticity of these two poems If the above
MORAL BALADE be "the dullest sermon that ever was written," and if it, and
other things equally dull, be the whole of Scogans poetical remains, whence
arises your authority for giving him the very familiar appellation of "our
JOCULAR BARD?" since, by your own account, his jests and his poetry had not the
remotest connection. It is not unlikely, however, (to allow you all possible
justice) that, in thus summing up his character in two words, you had your eye
upon the following ingenious composition, which he wrote at Oxford, on taking
his degree of A. M. and wherein both his talents are united.

"A Master of Art is not worth a fart,
"Except he be in schools;
"A Batchelour of Law is not worth a straw,
"Except he be among fools."

, every person else must be convinced that the Scogan, by and to whom they were
respectively written, could not possibly be a buffoon in the court of Edward
IV. This was a difficulty you could not reconcile to your hypothesis: you were,
therefore, resolved to deny, or, at least, to doubt, the evidence that made for
the opposite side of the question, and to cut the knot which you could not
untye. For a little enquiry or attention must have informed you, that the true
name of the poet Scogan was HENRY, and not JOHN. This Mr. Tyrwhitt has clearly
shown, and thence (perhaps rather too hastyly) inferred that the story of
Scogan the jester was an absurd and improbable fiction; nay, he has even
(contrary to his usual candor) gone so far as to call the jest-book, of which
you have so exalted an opinion, "a collection of foolish stories." The merits
of the work I shall leave to be settled between yourselves; but this really
learned and ingenious gentleman will not, I trust, take it amiss, if I shall
venture to assert, that there actually was such a person as JOHN SCOGAN; a
totally distinct character from Henry, the poet; and who, though no "jocular
bard," (unless you will allow the extract in the note sufficient to authorize
the title) must, in my mind, have been "a fellow of infinite jest, of most
excellent fancy." I do not, in forming this opinion, rely altogether upon your
friend Dr. Andrew Board; though it will appear, that the account given by him
is not entirely void of probability This writer informs us, he had "heard say,
that Scogin did come of an honest stock, no kindred, and that his friends did
set him to school at Oxford, where he did continue till he was made master of
art." He appears, from the book, to have been dead before Henry the sevenths
time. He is there frequently called TOM, by Sir William Nevyle, and is
introduced to court as his fool: possibly, however, this might have been the
common appellation of such characters: we still say TOM FOOL. SCOGGINS JESTS,
n.d. 4 to. b. 1.
; neither do I lay much stress on what Shallow says in 2 Hen. IV. -- "Bale,
inaccurately," you say (but why, inaccurately? he certainly knew more about the
fellow than you can do) "calls Scogan, the JOCULATOR of Edward the fourth;" --
the kings JESTER: there is no inaccuracy in the phrase, and you admit the fact.
But I shall produce still better and more unexceptionable authority: and,
first, we will see what master Raphael Hollinshed says of him (speaking of the
great men of Edward the fourths time). "Skogan, a learned gentleman, and
student for a time in Oxforde, of a pleasant wit, and bent to merry devises,
in respect whereof he was called into the court, where giving himself to his
natural inclination of mirthe and pleasant pastime, he played many sporting
parts, although not in such uncivil manner as has been of him reported His.
Eng. II: 1355. By "uncivil" reports, he evidently alludes to Dr. Bordes
Story-book; a circumstance of which the reader will have little doubt, on
perusing the following merry jest. entitled, "How Scogin let a fart, and said
it was worth forty pounds."

"That time that Scogin was conversant, both in the kings chamber, and in the
quens, Scogin would peak here and there, about in the queens chamber or
lodging; the queen by custom (as most commonly all great women and ladies and
gentlewomen do) let a fart, saying. The same is worth to me twenty pound.
Scogin hearing this, girt out a fart like a horse or mare, saying, if that fart
be so dear, of twenty pound, my fart is worth forty pounds." (p. 23.)

The story immediately preceding, "How Scogin played horse-play in the queens
chamber," is still more "uncivil."

The title of the book is, "Scogins Jests: Full of witty mirth, and pleasant
shifts; done by him in France, and other places. Being a preservative against
melancholy. Gathered by Andrew. Board, doctor of physic."

Amongst these ancient and vulgar pleasantries is the (supposedly modern) story
of the French quack, and his flea-powder, and Smollets tale of the three black
crows (here augmented to twenty-one). There is likewise the joke of the Oxford
scholars proving two eggs to be three; and that of the sharpers convincing the
fellow that his sheep were hogs: besides many other suchlike things, usually
met with in more modern books.


." Secondly, here is his EPITAPH, transcribed from an authentic MS. in the
British Museum MSS. Harl. 1587. It is remarkable for containing the name of
Cardinal Pole, written by himself, when a boy at school.
, an evidence which must be decisive as to his existence, character, and
christian name: Hic iacet in tumulo corpus SCOGAN ecce JOHANNIS
Sit tibi pro speculo letus fuit eius in annis
Leti transibunt transitus vitare nequibunt
Quo nescimus ibunt vinosi cito Ribunt.


This MS. appears to have been written toward the latter part of Edward the
fourth's time; so that you are peculiarly happy in your conjecture, that Scogan
"FLOURISHED about the year 1480 I could never conceive, Mr. Warton, to what
Drayton alludes, in the preface to his Eclogues, where he says, that "the Colin
Clout of SCOGAN, under Henry the seventh, is pretty." He is speaking of
pastoral poetry; and adds, that "Barklays ship of fools has twenty wiser in
it." You somewhere say, "he must mean SKELETON;" but what PASTORAL did HE write?
."

P. 138.

"I refer also the NOTBROWNE MAID to this period ( i. e. the reign of Ed. IV.)
That is, because you know no better than Prior did, when he called it three
hundred years old. It cannot possibly be earlyer than Henry the eighths time.
You are equally mistaken about "the delectable history of king Edward the
fourth and the tanner of Tamworth," which (as we have it now) is certainly not
older than the latter part of queen Elizabeth's reign. By a parity of reasoning,
I suppose, if it had been the delectable history of king HENRY the fourth, or
king Edward the FIRST, and the aforesay'd tanner, you would have carried it
fifty or a hundred years still further back. I readyly, however, admit, that
the poem has been much modernised, and that the original (of which, I am
certain, you never before heard) is probably as old as the time you mention,
having seen and transcribed an ancient MS. copy, which appeared to have been
written in or about the reign of Henry the seventh, entitled, "THE KING AND THE
BARKER i. e. of "Dantre," or Daventry, and not Tamworth.
."

P. 153.

Though I very willingly agree with you in determining the poems of Rowley to
be modern ill-contrived forgeries, yet I must beg leave to think, that neither
"MS. Wantn." nor any other, gives you the least authority for saying, that "SIR
CHARLES BALDWIN was executed at Bristol in the presence of Edward the fourth,
in the year 1463." This name and circumstance (if not from Chattertons poem)
are entirely of your own invention. And how is it possible that ROWLEYS MEMOIRS
should be composed in 1460, when he speaks of king Edward IV. as the reigning
prince, who did not attain the crown till the following year; and expressly
mentions his Bristow tragedy: the relation of an event which, according to your
own account, did not happen before 1463 (or, as you afterward correct
yourself, 1462 or 1461)?

P. 166.

"The reader will observe, that whether there are eight or SEVEN lines, I have
called it the OCTAVE stanza." I see you have; and should, from this curious
remark, be rather apt, if it were not for better intelligence, to assign your
birth, parentage, and education, to a country more remarkable for such like
observations than our own. You are, I imagine, so far acquainted with
mathematics, as to know that SEVEN is not EIGHT, any more than 4, 6, 9, or 10:
for you likewise call Spensers the OCTAVE stanza; by the same license, I
suppose, as you elsewhere tell us that a poem, containing SIX lines in each
verse, was "printed in FIVE-LINED STANZAS Vol. ii. p. 81.
."

P. 177.

"He [ sci. Richard I.] regnyd almost TWO year."

Be so good as to look at your original, and see whether it be not, as it
should be, TEN year, instead of TWO.

P. 179.

Having displayed your ingenious conjectures, that Ranulph Higden, the
chronicler, was author of the Chester Whitsun Plays, you tell us, that "in
Piers Plowman, a FRIAR says, that he is well acquainted with the rimes of
Randall of Chester;" and add, "I take this passage to allude to THIS VERY
PERSON, and to his compositions of this kind, for which he was probably soon
famous." Very well; every thing, you suppose, is so far smooth and safe. And
now, Mr. Warton, let me observe two things to you: 1st. The fellow, in Piers
Plowman, to whom you mean to refer, is NOT a FRIAR, but an idle, drunken,
SECULAR PRIEST. 2dly. He does NOT say, that he is well acquainted with THE
"rimes of Randall of Chester;" he only tells us, that he "CAN rimes of Roben
Hode and Randal of Chester." i. e. that he could SING or REPEAT rimes or songs
(not MADE BY, but) OF AND CONCERNING Robin Hood and Randal of Chester; -- not
Randal Hygden, but Randal Blundeville, EARL of CHESTER, a crusader and
celebrated hero, greatly in favor with the common people, and contemporary
with Robin Hood. You begin now to perceive what a ridiculous figure your
conclusion cuts, and into what a miserable dilemma you have got: for, unless
you will allow that YOUR friar could spout plays written by Robin Hood, you
cannot be permitted to say, that he alludes to the Whitsun Mummeries of Randal
Hygden, how famous soever you may suppose him to have been on that account.

P. 187.

"Which be omytted, now not put in ure."

That is, as you explain it "not mentioned here:" Flat nonsense! the meaning
is, not now put in use, not used at present.

P. 192.

"INFORTUNIO." You had best be sure whether Spenser ever assumed this
appellation. In the mean time I will inform you, that the author of this poem,
on the miseries of Edward II. was RALPH STARKEY the antiquary.

P. 199.

"The DEADMAN'S SONG...is worthy of Doctor Percy's excellent collection." I
really believe, Mr. Warton, that you are the only person in the world that
could think, or would say so. It is a most wretched performance, altogether
unworthy of republication: and for the justice of this character, I appeal to
the Doctor hisself; of whose taste in poetry (that is, where he understands it)
I have the highest opinion; and who may, indeed, easyly make it deserving of a
place in his "excellent collection," if he will but take the same pains with
it, which he has taken with most of the other old pieces so faithfully
reprinted in that celebrated work. It has done HIS busyness, however, and
that is enough.

P. 219.

"As Tully supposes SCIPIO to have shown the other world to his ANCESTOR
AFRICANUS."

So, in vol. iii. p. 236. "In imitation of Tully, who, in the Somnium
Scipionis, supposes SCIPIO to have shown the other world to his ANCESTOR
AFRICANUS."

IS THIS a proof, that you, Mr. Warton, have ever read the Somnium Scipionis?
or, a proof that you have been in a dream yourself? Is it possible, think you,
for such an absurdity to have proceeded from any other person?

P. 230.

"The HISTORY OF THE SEVEN CHAMPIONS, a book compiled in the reign of JAMES THE
FIRST, by one Richard Johnson, and containing some of the capital fictions of
the old Arabian romance." It is somewhat extraordinary, if this work were
written no sooner, that the AUTHOR of the OBSERVATIONS ON SPENSERS FAIRY QUEEN
should have represented it as one of those "miraculous books" which were so
highly fashionable in the reign of queen Elizabeth, and even as having been of
great assistance to Spenser in the formation of that poem. But I well know who
corrected him; and I likewise believe that the correcter knew very little more
of the matter than the corrected. The fact is, that both the author of the
Observations and the author of the History of English Poetry is wrong. For,
1st. The History of the Seven Champions was not written so early as the Fairy
Queen: and, 2dly. It was not "compiled in the reign of James the first." The
first position is not, indeed, quite so easy to prove, nor, as you yourself
here suppose the contrary, do I much care whether it be true or not: but the
other is certain, "The Seven Champions of Christendom" being quoted, as a
popular book, by Meres, in his WITS TREASURY, printed in 1598. With respect to
its containing any fiction of Arabian romance, you should, I think, first
adduce some such romance, containing similar fictions with the Seven Champions,
which is a mere olio from Guy, Bevis, and other old English romances and
story-books.

P. 231.

"The christian mon hedde farly
"What hit mihte mean."
"Was very attentive. Heeded."

Though I have, here and there, hastyly picked up a good large bavin of your
pretended explanations of ancient words, as they lay in my way, I certainly
have not made it a point to be very attentive to them. Your blunders are beyond
computation, "out of all cess;" and I have neither the leisure nor the patience
to detect you in every one. But your ignorance is so amazing and unaccountable,
in many of them, that I cannot choose but bestow more attention upon them than
I otherwise would do. For instance, how could you contrive to misinterpret, and
corrupt the above simple phrase "hedde ferly," as you have done? The lowest
person in Trinity college, the porter, nay your old bed-maker, had you asked
them the question, would have immediately informed you its meaning was purely
this: The christian man had ferly (i. e. wonder), what it might mean.

Ibid.

"Clear ipavet with get."
"Paved with griff, i. e. sand, or gravel."
O monstrous! Did you never hear of such a thing as Jet?

P. 234.

"Hector, Joshua, Judas Maccabeus, king David, Alexander the Great, Julius
Caesar, Arthur, Charlemagne, and Godfrey of Bulloign."

"THESE are the NINE WORTHIES [O, you have found them out at last!] to whom
Shakespeare alludes in Loves Lab. Lost. "Here is like to be a good presence of
WORTHIES: he present Hector of Troy; the Swain, POMPEY THE GREAT; the
Parish-curate, Alexander; Armado's Page, HERCULES; THE Pedant, Judas
Macchabeus, etc." ACT v. Sc. i."

Are POMPEY and HERCULES, Mr. Warton, two of those NINE WORTHIES you have just
enumerated?

P. 277.

"The Scottish Saxons." -- Some of your North British readers will no doubt be
glad to see your authority for converting all their Lowland countrymen into
SAXONS.

P. 281.

"I believe the editors name ( i. e. the name of the editor of Bp. Douglases
Virgil, in 1710) wa ROBERT FREEBAIRN, a Scotchman." A most astonishing
declaration! -- I mean from the unparalleled ignorance of its maker. The editor
of his book being well know, by every one any way conversant in, or inquisitive
after, such matters, to have been Mr. THOMAS RUDDIMAN, a learned and ingenious
critic, and most worthy, amiable, and modest man. The reader will smile to find
ROBERT FREEBAIRN -- one of his printers.

P. 284 (note n.) 285 (note f.) 286 (note k.)

Pray, Mr. Warton, will you do me the favor to inform me how you came by
these? -- Few people can write better language than yourself; what necessity,
therefore, could induce you to pilfer from a dead man? I say, PILFER; for each
of THESE NOTES, as you well know, is STOLEN VERBATIM from the late M. Fawkeses
Imitation of Douglas.

P. 296.

What authority can you possibly have to pronounce the word gyir a mask or
masquerade? Most ridiculous! "The reid Etin and the gyir catling [carling],"
are two of the "pleasand histories? discryved by this worthy knight Sir David
Lindsay.
: The last edition of whose works you "believe" to be "at Edinburght, 1709.
12mo." There haven been, at least half a score impressions since.

P. 312.

And does the author of "Grysilde? really say that Prince HENRY was Queen
Catherines FIRST husband; and on account of her tender years never slept with
her? We must have your History of England next!

P. 328.

"The kirk-kow," of which you know not what to make, is, the MORTUARY.

P. 329.

"Oppressioun the person I leif until
"Pouir men's corn to halde upon the rig
"Quhill he get the teynd alhail at his will.
"To keep the corn of the poor in the rig or RICK."

Now why will you be so absurd as to be thus continually busying yourself with
passages which you do not understand, and which nobody could want you to
explain if you did? Your attempts are as impertinent as they are unsuccessful.
The rig is the RIDGE of the open field, where the parson is so oppressive as to
detain the whole of the poor peoples corn till he thinks fit to draw his tithe.

P. 356.

"About the year 1512, MARTIN COCCCAIE of Mantua, whose true name was THEOPHILO
FOLENGIO, a Benedictine monk of Casino in Italy, wrote a -- burlesque Latin
poem, in heroic meter, checquered with ITALIAN and TUSCAN words." This is,
surely, the most curious passage that was ever yet found in a history! Any
other person than yourself would have naturally supposed that a non-existent
character could not have written a book; and, if he had said any thing, would
have told his readers that such a one, under such an assumed name, did so and
so. But it seems to be your chief study (if you study at all) to court
absurdity, rather than to avoid it: Here being no less than three choice
blunders in little more than so many lines. For, in the first place, the
assumed name of the aobve writer not MARTIN, but MERLIN, Coccaie. 2dly. His
true one was not Theophilo FOLENGIO, but Teofilo FOLENGO. And 3dly. The most
illiterate person must know that the Italian and Tuscan is either one and the
same language, or, at least, that Tuscan words must necessaryly be Italian
ones. But, I ask your pardon, you do not, perhaps, know that Tuscany is in
Italy: Ignorant you certainly are, that the dialect made use of in the above
poem is the Mantuan; which would be almost as difficult to a native of
Florence, as to a native of Madrid. You have well observed that you went out of
your way to mention such obscure versifyers as Folengus and Arena; for you
neither prove that Skeleton copyed the manner (indeed, it would have been
surprising if he had, as he wrote before either), nor that their singular mode
of versification was known in England, nor his in France or Italy. Indeed you
evidently to not know what Macaronic poetry is. The POLEMO-MIDDINIA is
undoubtedly the first regular imitation of Folengo, I mean the first Macaronic
poem, by a native of Great Britain, now know. It is a foolish conceit that
Skeltons mode of writing is designed to be ridiculed by Shakspeare in the
passage you quote; which is the common jingleing conclusion of several of
Caxton and de Words prose addresses to their readers.

P. 357.

"COGENIAL" Let me recommed CONGENIAL to your next edition; you can use words,
Mr. Warton, better than you can make them.

P. 360.

If the existence of this before unheard of Morality The Nigramansir, by
Skeleton. What says Mr. Steevens to this discovery? What, Mr. Malone?
rest entirely upon the dictum of the author of the History of English Poetry,
I had rather, if you please, withhold my belief till its production.

P. 380.

"Hamlet seems to be quoting an old play, at least an old song, on Jepthah's
story." You did not then know, it seems, that this very song was printed by
your "learned friend and fellow laborer" the lord bishop of Dromore? No more
than he did, when giving it as communicated to him by Mr. Steevens from the
mouth of a lady, that it was extant in an old black-letter copy in --; but the
collection might suffer by the discovery And it would not be the first, if it
did: -- Dulwich-college, to wit.
, which I will not, therefore, make It is somewhat more extraordinary that the
same right reverend and ingenious prelate and ballad-maker should not have
known, when he printed the song which he has entitled "Jealousy tyrant of the
Mind" "from a MANUSCRIPT COPY communicated to the editor." that it was written
by Mr. Dryden, and already extant in every of his tragi-comedy of LOVE
TRIUMPHANT.
.

P. 405.

"Morte Arthur -- then recently published." This very expression I noticed
before; but as there were, on that occasion, only some 20 or 30 years is
dispute between us, I did not think it worth my while to interrupt you: I will
now, however, beg leave to ask you, what you mean: Whether that this romance
was "recently published" in Shallows, or Shakspeares time? In the reign of
Henry the fourth, or of queen Elizabeth? You must necessaryly mean either the
one or the other; and you will be above a hundred years wrong, before of behind
hand, mean which you will. But I give you this to digest at leisure.

P. 411.

"Leo, while he was pouring the thunder of his anathemas against the heretical
doctrines of Martin Luther, published a BULLE OF EXCOMMUNICATION against all
those who should dare to censure the poems of Ariosto."

Everybody would, I believe, be glad to learn where you picked up this curious
piece of secret history? Some authority you had for it, no doubt, though I much
suspect you were ashamed to mention it. The anecdote reads prettyly enough, to
be sure; what a pity, now, if it should happen not to be true. Paulus Jovius, I
dare say, among the many strange things he relates, does not tell you this;
which, I am apt to imagine, you have caught (at second-hand) from M. de
Voltaire. Ah, master Warton, master Warton, I am afraid he will prove a poor
support to you! Good jests make only bad history. But now, what will the world
think of you, -- nay, what will you think of yourself, -- (though I confess you
have a great many literary sins of much greater consequence to answer for --
Ay, and your back is broad enough, -- your mind callous enough, -- and your
face -- bold enough, to bear them all, and a thousand or two more) if this
famous BULLE should appear to be (as it certainly is) no more than a common
license to Ariosto, or his bookseller, to print and publish the Furioso within
the papal dominions for a certain number of years, prohibiting every other
person from printing or publishing it within that term? This discovery will, I
doubt, M. Warton, go near to turn your BULL into a CAFE.

EMENATIONS AND ADDITIONS. Vol. I. P. 190.

"The French prose romance of Robert le Diable, printed in 1496, is extant in
the LITTLE COLLECTION, OF TWO VOLUMES, CALLED BIBLIOTHERQUE BLEUE."

And pray, Mr. Warton, when and where might this same pretty little collection
be printed, or where can one possibly meet with it? For I sincerely believe it
was never heard of before. -- What astonishing ignorance! This same " little
collection" consists of no less than fifty or a hundred story books in 4 to.
and 8vo. generally printed at Troyes, and which, like our penny histories, are
published, always singly, in a small type, upon coarse paper, and at low
prices, chiefly for the amusement of the common people in France; and have been
quaintly enominated la Bibliotheque bleue Fresnoy calls them so, Bibliotheque
de Romans; a book which it is very likely you have confounded with the
publications he alludes to.
from their being usually coverd with blue paper.

"There is an old English MORALITY on this tale ( i. e. Robert the Devil),
under the very corrupt title of ROBERT CICYLL, which was represented at the
High-cross in Chester, in 1529. There is a manuscript copy of the poem, on
vellum, in Trinity college library at Oxford, MSS. Number. LVII. fol." As to the
representation of this supposed Morality, we must entirely rely upon what you
are pleased to say: And as the MS. is in your own college (though I do not
perfectly know what you mean) it would be extremely uncandid, and even absurd,
to suppose that you had not looked into it. But whether you have or not ^s of
very little consequence, as I will take upon myself to say, that if ROBERT
CICYLL be its title it has no more connection with, nor bears any more
resemblance to, the story of Robert the Devil, than it has with, or bears to,
that of Jack the Giant-killer, or Tom Thumb. And I appeal to -- YOUR -- SELF --
when you have compared them.

P. 197, to l. 15.

"Sire Jovyn." -- Your learned note on these two words might have been well
spared. Sire Jovyn is just the same as Sir Jove.

ADDITIONS AND EMENDATIONS. Vol. II.

Sign. h. note f.

"LE BONE FLORENCE OF ROME" has not the remotest allusion to the story of
Florent. Florence is a lady; the emperors daughter.

Sign. h. 3. 6.

"So our king Richard the first, in a fragment of one of his Provencial
sonnets." The line hou have quoted is neither written by RICHARD I. nor is it
in the FRAGMENT of a sonnet: The piece to which it belongs is an entire song,
composed by the emperor Frederick Barbarossa.

Sign. i. 3.

"Turgot diet in 1015." This is most extraordinary. You have elsewhere ii. 148.
said, and (what is not very usual with you) said truly, that he "died
bishop of Saint Andrews, in 1115." The first date might therefore have passed
for an error of the press, had you not, unfortunately, made it the foundation
of an argument against the authenticity of one of Rowleys poems; a purpose for
which the true date would not have served. You have, Mr. Warton, in the course
of this idle controversy acquitted yourself with uncommon adroitness, and
gained every advantage you could wish for over your numerous adversaires. And,
while you thus artfully fabricate your own facts, how should it be otherwise?

VOL. III.
P. i.

"DISSERTATION ON THE GESTA ROMANORUM." This ingenious contrivance takes up 97
pages. A pretty reasonable assistant! Was it inserted for any other purpose?
Has it any particular connection with the history of English poetry in the 16th
century? O, no; but it serves to fill up the volume, and that is enough.
Excellent historian!

P. xii.

" All the SIKE that to him come
"I heled were swithe sone
"Of fet and eke of hand."
Now, would any one who had read a single line of old poetry, or of any thing
else -- could any person of common sense conceive it possible that a writer who
presumes hisself equal to a history of English poetry, should make such
nonsense of this simple passage, as to misinterpret "all the sike," "ALL THEY
SIGHED?" But so it is. We are to consider this, I suppose, as a slight
inaccuracy, to which great geniuses are ever most subject: Hang me, though, Mr.
Warton, if I do; I say, it proceeds from ignorance, sheer radical ignorance,
and nothing else. All the SICK (says the poet) that came to him were healed
immediately. You reach the extreme of absurdity if (which I really think is the
case) you take the letter I for a pronoun.

P. lxxxi.

"When the cloth to end was wrowght
"To the Sowdan sone hit was browzt,
"My fadyr was a noble man,
"Of the Sowdan he hit wan."
"Soldan's son." Your gross and unaccountable stupidity, Mr. Warton, shall for
once save you. This is too bad.

P. 13.

"MAIDEN is a corruption of the old French Magne, or Main, great. Thus
Maidenhead...signifies the great PORT...So also, Maiden Bradley... is the great
Bradley, etc.

You can put your words together very prettyly, I confess; but it does not
thence follow that you should be acquainted with their origin and descent.
Points on which even that great luminary, or rather dark-lantern, of
literature, Dr. Johnson, is altogether ignorant. What then could be expected
from YOU? The etymology in the quotation is beneath contempt: and could only
have been advanced by a writer equally pert, vain, and injudicious. MAY DUN are
two ancient British words, signifying a great hill: Thus Maiden castle
(Edinburgh) is -- not Castrum Puellarum, but -- a castle upon a high hill.
Bradley (though Saxon) is, comparatively, a modern adjunct. (See BAXTERS
Glossary, 109.163). That Maidenhead was originally a great PORT, is a discovery
which has been entirely reserved to crown your peculiar sagacity and skill: and
great is your merit with the topographer, the antiquary, and the linguist.

P. 31.

"Our author (Wyatt) has more imitations and even translations from the Italian
poets than Surrey. Petrarch has described the perplexities of a lover's mind,
etc.

Pace non trovo, e non ho da far guerra, etc.

"Wyatt has thus copied this sonnet of epigrams. I find no peace, etc."

I had puzzled myself for a long time to find out how you could possibly become
acquainted with the circumstances of Wyatts obligation to Petrarch. For I can
never believe that you ever read the Italian poet. I have, indeed, sometimes
thought that the truly learned Mr. Tyrwhitt might have furnished you with this
piece of information: But, if you had received many such favors from him, your
book would have cut a very different sigure from what it does; and I should
have been deprived of the honor of addressing you upon the subject. At other
times I have doubted whether you were not indebted to your illustrious friend
the bishop of Dromore: But alas! I know not that his lordship is much better
acquainted with Petrarch than yourself. I might, indeed, have remained in
perpetual ignorance, if I had not accidentally cast my eye upon the 15th page
of the 10th volume of the last edition of Shakspeare; where I find the
ingenious Dr. Farmer quoting this very sonnet, and referring to Wyatts
translation with all the particularities you could have desired. But still I am
at a loss to know how you came to learn that the passage in Petrarchs sonnet,
which you have pointed out, "is taken from Messen Jordi, a PROVENCIAL poet of
VALENCIA." Sure I am that you can know nothing of the Valencian poets: And
therefore, though I am pretty well satisfied that no such person as MESSEN JORDI
ever existed, I shall not accuse you of inventing the name and circumstance
alluded to; indeed I strongly suspect whence you drew them, though I have it not
a present in my power to satisfy myself. Be that as it may, to call him "a
PROVENCIAL poet of VALENCIA" is one of those Irish-English bulls for which you
alone must be answerable. A FRENCH poet of SPAIN, or a SPANISH poet of FRANCE!
Why would you, my dear sir, trust yourself so far from home; in a strange
country, too; and (which is worst of all) where anybody had been before, or
could come after, you?

P. 35.

"In lusty leas at liberty I walk."

"In large fields, over fruitful grounds." Contemptible! In pleasant meads.

P. 44.

Are you sure, Mr. Warton, that George Gascoyne was the author of the Panegyric
on the English Poets? (Compare ii. 130. n. i.)

P. 64.

"What star does let the hurtful sire to rage."

Sire you interpret, SATURN. A sort of small mistake, into which ignorant
people will sometimes unavoidably stumble: What think you of SIRIUS, the
dog star?

P. 67.

"The Tragedy of GORDOBUCKE That this blunder has proceeded from the author and
not from the press, appears from its occuri^g in many other places, indeed
wherever the drama is spoken of. See in particular vol. iii. p. 356.
, written in 1561." You seem to be so perfectly acquainted with the title of
this play, that one cannot doubt your having seen it.

P. 102.

"To some part of the reign of Henry the eighth I assign the Tournament of
Tottenham...the substance of its phraseology, which I diverst of its obvious
innovations, is not altogether obsolete enough for a higher period. I am aware,
that in a manuscript of the British Museum it is referred to the time of Henry
the sixth. But that manuscript affords no positive indication of that date."

Such a shuffleing, nonsensical paragraph was, I firmly believe, never put
together since the invention of letters. That which I do not, and which, I
think, no one can, understand, I shall not meddle with. Here is an authentic
MS. which not only Mr. Tyrwhitt (and when I mention him I suppose I need not
care if there be a hundred of a different opinion) but every other person who
has seen it, is satisfied and convinced could not have been written later than
the reign of Henry the sixth. NOW YOU, Mr. Warton, who, to be sure, must be an
incomparable judge of what you never saw, pronounce it near a century more
modern, because, forsooth, it only refers the poem to that age (which it
certainly does not) and gives no "positive indication" of such a date (which it
certainly does). But if the book had been evidently written in Edward the
seconds time, the same absuid plea would have served you. There is not one MS.
out of a hundred that has any "positive indication" of the particular period in
which it has been written; and yet people who are in the practice of inspecting
and comparing MSS. of different ages, can assign to each its proper date,
nearly as well as it they had sound it in the book. But what is all this to
you, who know nothing either of ancient writing or of ancient language? For I
will venture to say, that the style of this very composition bespeaks it at
least a hundred years older than the Nutbrowne Maid, which, not only without,
but against, all authority, you have thrown so far back as the reign of Henry
VI. Your recantation proves nothing but your ignorance The right revd. the lord
bp. of Dromore has, in the third edition of his "Relics of Ancient English
Poetry," (vol. ii. p. 13.) printed the TURNAMENT OF TOTTENHAM from the above
MS. This copy I naturally suppose you have not seen; or you must, I think, have
perceived the absurdity of mentioning "obvious innovations." His lordship has
indeed told us, that the last stanza is not in the MS. but in this he is
positively mistaken.


P. 103. note (z).

For the purpose of observing that the stanza used by one man is the same with
that used by another (a most prosound and important remark, and extremely
necessary, especially in this place!) there was, surely, no occasion to foist
in a poem of sixteen stanzas. O yes, I beg your pardon, but there was: -- To
lengthen and stuff your work, which without such ingenious contrivances, such
adventitious helps, you could never have been able to spin out to three large
quarto volumes before you come to Spensers Fairy Queen: The OBSERVATIONS on
which (for I suppose you will of course lug in the whole of your former work;
and, indeed, as it is entirely forgotten, and may therefore safely appear as new
matter, one cannot disapprove your economy) will naturally make the subject of
a fourth; and thus you will proceed, I supposed, with a volume a year, so long
as the credulity of the public will keep you in countenance. I love to speak
out, Mr. Warton; I really believe you will not, willingly, close the work so
long as you can make a single guinea by it I am not unaware that you have
informed us of the fourth volume being in the press, which will complete the
work; but they who put implicit faith in such assurances can never have seen,
or must have entirely forget, the following advertisement at the end of the
second edition of your POEMS (1779), and which was, doubtless, inserted in the
newspapers of that year: -- "SPEEDILY will be published, by the same Author,
the Third and LAST Volume of the History of English Poetry: In which the
Subject will be carried [ brought, I suppose you mean] down to the Commencement
of the PRESENT Century." How well you kept your word will appear by the volume
itsself, which was not published till near three years after, and in which the
subject is not even carried down (as you call it) to the commencement of the
LAST.
. It is, in my opinion, a most extraordinary, and, I hope and believe,
unparalleled circumstance, that a man of eminence in the literary world should,
in order to enhance the bulk and price of his writings, hazard his reputation
upon, and descend to, or rather be guilty of, such low, such paltry, such
dishonorable, and even dishonest artifices, as almost to deserve the name and
punishment of a -- SWINDLER.

P. 108.

"For the purpose of ascertaining or illustrating the age of pieces which have
been lately, or will be soon produced, I here stop to recall the readers
attention to the poetry and language of the last ( sci. the 15th) century, by
exhibiting some extracts from the manuscript romance of YWAIN and GAWAIN, which
has some great outlines of Gothic painting, and appears to have been written in
the reign of HENRY THE SIXTH. I premise, that but few circumstances happened,
which contributed to the improvement of our language, within THAT and the
PRESENT PERIOD."

How modest! how ingenuous! -- But, indeed, I ought to apologize for this and
the other long extracts I have taken the liberty of producing from your
celebrated history; however, as the mode has been adopted, rather for the sake
of giving you fair play, and doing you SUBSTANTIAL JUSTICE, than with a view to
injure the rapid sale of the work, you will, I flatter myself, have no
inclination to be displeased at it. But, to return: -- And so you really
thought it necessary to go back a full hundred years to new-write the History
of English Poetry during that period. A most systematical historian, doubtless!
What would any of Mr. Humes readers have thought of him, if in the middle of
Henry the eighths reign he had stopped to recall their attention to a new
history of the reign of Henry the sixth? What could there possibly be in the
state of our language and poetry, at the period you had got to, which could
require, could authorize, could justify, or even excuse, your going back a
hundred years to begin your story anew? That which you affect "to premise,"
with respect to the language having received no improvement between the two
periods, is a glaring inconsistency. You wilfully forget, as you wish your
readers to do, that there has been a SURREY and a WYATT just mentioned. If any
other person had advanced such a groundless and absurd position, you must have
taken him for either a fool or a madman. But the truth, Mr. Warton, the truth
is, that you knew nothing of this romance when you might properly enough have
introduced it, (not in the reign of Henry VI. for that is an age it does not
belong to;) you were as entirely ignorant of the existence of such a poet as
Laurence Minot, before you saw Mr. Tyrwhitts Chaucer (which, by the way, was
published soon enough for you to have made a better use of it It appeared three
years before the publication of your second volume: in the body of which it is,
I believe, never once mentioned.
, as you still are of his marit. I know that these communications were made to
you after the publication of your second volume; but you were resolved, it
seems, to drag them, at all events, neck and heels, into your third; and, I am
ready to confess, they well answer the purpose for which you introduced them:
-- they stuff your book! But, now, Mr. Warton, suffer me, if you please, to say
a few words to you upon the age of this same MS. COTTON GALB. E. ix. which, by
the way, I believe you never saw, and yet I can hardly think any other person
could have been so grossly deceived as to suppose it of the age of Henry VI. I
will venture to assure you (and I do not care a farthing whether you believe me
or not) that the writing of this book is as old, at least, as the time of king
Richard the second. But I well know that all the world will be convinced of
your want of judgment before you yourself suspect it.

P. 109.

"Lions, beres, both bull and bare,
"That rewfully began rope and rare."
Rope you explain by "ramp." But it means, to cry aloud, to bellow. Sales by
the common crier in Scotland are at this day said to be "by public ROUP."

P. 112.

"Take the bacyn sone onane."

Onane, "perhaps, in hand." Decently said; but perhaps not. What think you of
ANON?

P. 113.

"The store winds blew full loud,
"So kene came never are of clowd."
Are, "air." You afterward (p. 117.) make it mean, ever. But all is one to you.
It is, in both places, BEFORE.

P. 115.

"Tharfore, he said, You sal aby."

Aby, "Abide. Stay." Nonsense! SUFFER.

Ibid.

"For mate I lay on the grownde."

Mate, "sleep." He lay as if he had been DEAD.

P. 117.

"Til he come to that leyir sty."

Leyir, "wicked, bad." That the word lither has generally some such meaning, I
readyly confess; it seems here, however, rather to signify, unlucky, fatal.

Sty, "that is the FOREST. But I do not precisely know the meaning of sty."
Then how do you know it means the forest? Why do you say any thing, when you
know nothing? But I cry you mercy; if you had observed that plan, we should
never have beheld your matchless history. For the benefit, however, of your
next edition, if it live to see one; if not, for the list of blunders to your
present volume (which you will modestly entitle, "Emendations and Additions") I
shall inform you, that sty is PLACE. (...), Sax. Thus hog- sty is a place for
hogs; and home stead, the place where the house stands. It likewise, as place
does, signifies a house. Hence, Steward, (...). In your quotation from EMARE it
is a different word, from (...), a road or way. -- After all, however, there
are several lines in this part of the poem evidently and egregiously out of
their place: a circumstance which, had you understood what you were printing,
and pretend to explain, you could not have failed to perceive.

P. 122.

"Opon a sawter all of gulde,
"To say the sal-mas fast sho bigan."
Sawter. "Psaltery, a harp, of gold." Admirable interpreter! -- She directly
began to read the soul-mass in a PSALTER finely gilded.

P. 141.

"It is highly probable, that the metrical romances of RICHARD CUER DE LION,
GUY EARL OF WARWICK, and SIR BEVYS OF SOUTHAMPTON, were modernised in this
reign ( sci. that of Hen. VIII.) from more ancient and simple narrations." This
ingenious conjecture comes, to be sure, with perfect consistency from one who
has already produced large extracts from these very poems, as specimens of the
composition of Edward the seconds time. But, ingenious as it is, it contains
neither probability nor truth. All the above romances are extant in MSS. above
300 years old; and, one of them, at least, (Sir Bevis) excepting the
typographical incorrectness of the old printed copy, differs no otherwise from
it than in its orthography, and the slight variations inseparable from repeated
transcription. The ancient MS. copy of Richard Cuer de Lion is as long, at
least, as, if not longer than, the old editions: but whether the printed copies
agree with the MSS. or not, is a matter of very little consequence to your
hypothesis. It is a fact, that some MS. copies are so totally different from
each other, as not to have two lines in common; being translations from the
French by different hands. This is actually the case with respect to SIR GUY:
there are two distinct translations, both very old; one of which is, line for
line, the same with the printed copy. But it will not be found that the
phraseology or style is more polished, or the story more amplifyed or
intricate, in the editions, than they are in the MSS. Simplicity, indeed, is a
fault, of which few people will have reason to complain in the perusal of an
old metrical romance, let its antiquity be what it may. I shall take the
liberty to observe, in passing, that the printed copy of SIR GUY does NOT
begin, ITHEN the time that God was borne, as you, implicitly following AMES,
but, according to your constant practice, concealing the name of your
informant, have been pleased to assert Ames has printed Ithen for Sithen.
. Neither is it in octavo, but quarto.

P. 143.

Although you tell us you have seen a fragment of the book whence. "The Carol
brynging in the bores head" is taken, yet was I not without very strong
suspicions that you were indebted, as well for this same carol, as for the
printers colophon -- not to the book itsself, but -- to your honest,
industrious, useful, and ungratefully requited, friend and assistant, Thomas
Hearne, in his notes and spicilege upon William of Newbury, who had likewise,
as it appeared, furnished you with the anecdote from Hollinshed (p. 745). These
suspicions were not weakened on finding, by a comparison of you and your
authority, that said carol and colophon were printed with your usual accuracy.
But, upon further reflection, I am half inclined to question the justice of the
above suspicions; for it rather seems to me, that you have been, on this
occasion, GUILTY OF PRIVATELY STEALING -- from YOURSELF. And I Will tell you how.
In that very humourous trifle, entitled and called, "A COMPANION TO THE GUIDE,
AND A GUIDE TO THE COMPANION," I see that you have inserted the whole of Mr.
Hearnes account verbatim, and with a circumstance which might, elsewhere, have
been more to your honor: -- you have given a minute and accurate reference to
your real authority. I say elsewhere; for it is, in this place, done merely
with a view to raise a laugh at the expense of that most worthy and respectable
antiquary; whom, I rather think, you have, in the above piece, made somewhat
too-many attempts to ridicule; forgetting, perhaps, that though he was less
polished in his taste, and less elegant in his diction than some more modern
writers, few, if any of them, can boast of such a sacred regard to truth, and
of such unimpeached integrity. And whatever his errors are, there is one, in
which I wish you had imitated him as successfully as you have done in many
others of a less important and commendable nature: -- he has never been
detected in a wilful falsehood; nor been ever charged with the slightest
misrepresentation of the minutest fact.

Lest the number and uniformity of these dry expostulations should render them
too flat and tedious to yourself, or my other gentle readers, I shall make bold
to break the chain, and endeavor to enliven you and them with an old Christmas
carol upon bringing up the BOARS HEAD, very different from that printed by
Wynken de Word, and now, for the first time, faithfully published from an
ancient MS. in my own possession.

In die natiuitates.
Nowell, nowell, nowell, nowell,
Tidings good y thyngke to tell.
The borys head that we bring here,
Betokens a prnce with owte pere,
Is born this day to bye vus dear.
Nowell, etc.
A bore is a souerayn best
And acceptab[l]e in eury feste
So mote this lord be to most and lest.
Nowell, etc.
This borys head we bring with song
In worchyp of him that thus sprang
Of a virgin to redress all wrong.
Nowell, etc. If the gentlemen of QUEENS should deem the above carol more tasty
and elegant than that which they use at present, it is heartyly at their
service; and they may likewise command the original music, the accompanyment of
which would alone be sufficient to give this song a decided superiority over
the other, and cannot fail to render their boars-head dinner a REAL FEAST.
.
P. 149.

"The same BOAR, that is, EDWARD THE THIRD, is introduced by Minot as resisting
the Scottish invasion in 1347, at Nevils cross, near Durham.

"Sir David the Bruise
"Was at distance
When EDWARD THE BALIOLFE
"Rade with his lance."
Baliolfe you tell us means "WARLIKE." How despicably ignorant must you
conceive your readers, to dare, for a moment, to suppose that such stuff should
pass upon them for knowledge in history, criticism, and ancient language! Does
not every child know that EDWARD III. so far from playing the BOAR at Nevils
cross, was not even in England when that affair happened? Indeed, Minot
expressly mentions his absence in this very poem. Know, to your confusion, that
Edward the baliolfe is, EDWARD DE BALIOL! who is said, and, as it should seem,
with truth, to have had a principal command in the English army. Minot means to
reproach David (the Scottish king) with cowardice, in keeping out of Baliols way.

P. 161.

"The poetical annals of king Edward the sixth, who removed those chains of
bigottry which his BROTHER Henry had only loosened." King Henry the eighth
BROTHER to Edward the sixth! O by all means, your history of England The word
brother may, however, with you, generally stand for son: in another place you
mention "Robert duke of Normandy, William the Conqueror's brother." (Dis. II.
Sign. b. 4. 0)
!

P. 206.

"The first Chanson a Boire, or Drinking-ballad, of any merit in our language,
appeared in the year 1551." -- " This song opens the second act of Gammer
Gurtons Needle, a comedy, written and printed in 1551, and soon afterward
acted at Christ's college in Cambridge." For this date you quote the authority
of "MSS. Oldys" (and quere that): but as to the play being soon afterward
acted at Christ's college, we have only your own. Both assertions, however, are
undoubtedly false. The play was acted BEFORE it was printed; and it was not
printed till 1575.

P. 255.

Well, Mr. Warton, you have at length got us dragged though HELL, into which we
found ourselves so unexpectedly plunged; and now, perhaps, you will (after I
have recovered my fright and breath) give me leave to ask you a single
question: To what purpose is all this long dissertation upon Dante? What
possible connection is there between the Divina Comedia, and the History of
English Poetry? "Pough, fool! it fills my book up, do'n't it?" Very true, sir,
it certainly does so; and, I think, THAT, from you, is such an unanswerable
argument for the necessity of this sort of maneuver, that I rather wonder you
have not favored us with a similar account of every epic or other poem of
which you know anything, or know nothing ('it is all the same), from Homer to
Milton. Trust me, I admire your modesty, though, doubtless, we shall have more
anon. But pray, as you have entertained us with so many Italian quotations,
give me leave to ask you, how long it may be since you became master of that
language? because I have heared, that, once upon a time, when you were
ambitious of displaying your erudition, in the OBSERVATIONS ON SPENSERS FAIRY
QUEEN, by an extract from Tasso, ( -- Tasso in the original! --) you
unfortunately laid hold of a wrong stanza, which occasioned much mirth among
those wicked wits, who are so maliciously disposed as not to suffer a man of
genius to enjoy the credit of talents and learning which he does not possess.

P. 273.

"I am not sure that the translator of Plutarchs Lives in 1579 is the same (
sci. as Sir Thomas North)." That is, because you never saw the book, nor knew
more of it than the common reference, or catalogue title of, Norths Plutarch.

P. 279.

"Dr. Ph. King, author of poems in 1657, son of King, bishop of London." And
pray, who told you that the name of this author was Philip? and who told you
that he was not a bishop hisself? And who told you P. 281.
that Vaulx was earl of OXFORD? or that Fairfaxes Christian name was EDMUND?

P. 339.

"Shakespeare was not the first that exhibited this tyrant Richard III.
upon the stage. In 1586, a BALLAD was printed, called "A tragic report of
king Richard the iii." This piece of information you have from the Stationers
book: but whence do you gather that it was a PLAY? or, if a play, that it had
been, or ever was, "exhibited upon the stage?"

P. 396.

"The imperfect work ( sci. Phaers Virgil) was at length completed in 1583. The
whole was printed at London in 1584." By thus boldly assuming facts, and
studiously concealing authorities, you have to answer both for the ignorance of
your informers and for your own. The work was perfected and published upwards
of ten years before: Shall I transcribe you the title?

"The whole xii Books of the Aeneidos of Virgill. Whereof the first ix. and
part of the tenth, were converted into English Meeter by Thomas Phaer Esquier,
and the residue supplied, and the whole work together newly set forth, by
Thomas Twyne Gentleman. There is added moreover to this edition, Virgils life
out of Donatus, and the Argument before every book. Imprinted at London by
Wyllyam How, for Abraham Veale, dwelling in Poules Church-yearde, at the sign
of the Lamb. 1573." 4 to. b. l.

Now, Mr. Warton, if your famous history should live to see asecond edition,
and you think fit to insert the above title, -- take my advice: -- Print it
correctly, or, Let it alone!

P. 399.

"I have seen an old ballad, called GADSHILL by FAIR -- In the Registers of
the Stationers, among sever Ballettes -- one is entitled" The Robery at
Gadshill," under the year 1558. I know not how far it might contribute to
illustrate Shakspeares Henry the fourth. The title is promising." It is so --
of a robbery. But pray, Mr. Warton, what was the subject of THAT BALLAD, which
(you say) you SAW? Its title is just as promising as the others; and, most
propably, it is the very same thing.

P. 423.

"The murninge of Edward duke of Buckingham" is not, as you, absurdly enough,
suppose, Sackvilles Legend, but a real ballad; which is still extant, and has
been lately reprinted.

P. 437.

"Marlowes wit and spriteliness of conversation had often the unhappy effect of
tempting him to sport with sacred subjects; more perhaps from the preposterous
ambition of courting the casual applause of profligate and unprincipled
companions, than from any systematic disbelief of religion. His skepticism,
whatever it might be, was construed by the prejudiced and peevish puritans into
absolute atheism: and they took pains to represent the unfortunate catastrophe
of his untimely death, as an immediate judgment from heaven upon his execrable
impiety."

A great deal has been said about Marlow, his opinions and exit, from age to
age; from Beard to Warton: the oldest writers ("prejudiced and peevish
puritans") directly arraigning him of atheism and blasphemy; and those of more
modern times (pious and orthodox churchmen) generously laboring to rescue his
character; either by boldly denying, or artfully extenuating the crimes
alleged against him: but not an iota of evidence has been produced on either
side. I have a great respect for Marlow as an ingenious poet, but I have a much
higher regard for truth and justice; and will therefore take the liberty to
produce the strongest (if not the whole) proof that now remains of his
diabolical tenets, and debauched morals; and if you, Mr. Warton, still choose
to think him innocent of the charge, I shall be very glad to see him thoroughly
white-washed in your next edition. The paper is transcribed from an old MS. in
the Harleian library, cited in one of your notes No 6853.
, and was never before printed.

A note containing the opinion of one Christofer Marlye concerning his
Damnable opinions and Judgment of Relygion and Scorn of Gods word This (which
is the old) title is partly struck out, and altered to the following one, by
another, and, as it seems, later hand: "A Note deliu'ed on whitson eve last of
the most horreble blasphemes vtteryd by Xposer Marly who wthin iij days These
three Days are, in your reference to the article, transformed into so many
Atheists, whom you are pleased to dispatch along with Marlow.
after came to a soden and fearful end of his life."
.
That the Indians and many Authors of Antiquitei have assuredly written of
above. 16. thowsande years agone, where Adam is proved to have leeved wthin. 6.
thousand years.

He affirms That Moses was but a Juggler and that one Heriots can do more
then he.

That Moses made the Jews to travel forty years in the wilderness (with iorny
might have been don in Less then one year) er they came to the promised Land
to the intent that those who were privei to most of his subtileteis might
perish, and so an ever lasting supersticion remain in the hearts of the people.

That the first beginnynge of Religion was only to keep men in awe.

That it was an easy matter for Moses being brought up in all the arts of
the Egiptians to abuse the Jews being a rvde and gross people.

That Christ was a Bastard and his mother dishonest.

That he was the son of a carpenter and that if the Jews among whom he was
borne did crvcifye him, they best knew him and whence he came.

That Christ deserved Better to dye then Barabas, and that the Jews made a
good choice, though Burrabas were both a theife and a murderer.

That if there be any God or good Religion, then it is in the papists because
the service of god is performed with more ceremonies, as elevaco^n of the mass,
Organs, singinge men shaven crowns, etc. That all protestants ar hipocritall
asses.

That, if he were put to write a new religion, he would undertake both a more
excellent, and more admirable method and that all the new testament is filthely
written.

That the Women of Samaria were whores and that Christ knew them dishonestlye.

That St John the Evangelist was bedfellow to Christ that he Leaned always in
his bosom, that he used him as the sinners of Sodom.

That all they that Love not tobacco and boys ar fools.

That all the Appostels were fishermen and base fellows, nether of wit nor
worth, that Pawle only had wit, that he was a timorous fellow in biddinge men
to be subject to magistrates against his conscience.

That he had as good right to Coin as the Queen of England, and that he was
acquainted with one poole a prisoner in Newgate who has great skill in mixture
of mettalls, and havinge Learned some things of him he meant through help of a
cvnnynge stamp maker to coin french crowns, pistoletts and english
Shillings.

That, if Christ had instituted the Sacraments with more ceremonyall reverence,
it would have been had in more admiraco^n, that it would have been much better
being administered in a Tobacco pype.

That the Angel Gabriell was Bawd to the holy Ghost because he brought the
Salutaco^n to marie.

That one Richard Cholmelei has confessed that he was persuaded by Marloes
reason to become an athieste. He is said for These words are inserted in the
margin by a different hand. They, perhaps, mean, that he ( i. e. Cholmelei) had
been sent after.
."


These things with many other shall by good and honest men be proved to be his
opinions and com^on speeches, and that this marloe com^eth, persuades men to
Athiesme, willinge them not to be afraid of bugbeares and Hobgoblins, and
utterly Scornynge both God and his ministers as J Richard Bome will Justify
both by my oath and the testimony of many honest men, and almost all men which
whom he has conversed any time will testefy the same And as J think all men
in christiantei ought to endevor that the mouth of so dangerous a member may be
stopped.

He says moreour that he has coated a numbe of contrarieties out of the
scriptures, with he has geeven to some great men who in convenient shall be
named. when these things shall be called in question, the witnesses shall be
produced The passages marked by dots are, in the original, struck through with
a pen, by the alterer of the title.
.

Rychard Bame.

From the above curious Confession of Faith it appears, I doubt, but too plain,
that these "prejudiced peevish puritans" had sufficient authority to assert,
that Marlow" denied God, and his son Christ, and nor only in word blasphemed
the Trinity, but also (as 'was' credibly reported) wrote books against it,
affirming our Savior to be but a deceiuer, and Moses to be but a coniurer and
seducer of the people, and the holy Bible to be but vain and idle stories,
and all religion but a device of policy Beards Theater of Gods Judgments,
(1631, 4 to.) p. 149. "Of Epicures and Atheists."
.

p. 437.

"An affray ensued ( sci. between Marlow and a servingman, his rival); in which
the antagonist, having by superior agility gained an opportunity of strongly
grasping Marlow's wrist, plunged his dagger with his own hand into his own
BOSOM."

Your propensity to corruption and falsehood seems so natural, that I have been
sometimes tempted to believe, you often substitute a lie in the place of a fact
without knowing it. How else you came to tell us that Marlow was stabbed in the
BOSOM I cannot conceive. It could not, surely, be for the smoothness of the
paragraph? All former writers, and Wood, amongst the rest, whom you expressly
quote, and (which does not always follow) by a slight peculiarity in your
expression, I think you must have consulted, say it was in his HEAD.

P. 438.

"IGNOTO, Raleighs CONSTANT SIGNATURE." Always confident, and always wrong! The
publisher of Englands Helicon never conceals the names of his writers where he
knows them; where he does not, he subscribes the word IGNOTO (Anonymous). And
this is so frequently the case, that a great number of the poems which he has
so distinguished have been since referred to their true authors: Some to
Shakspeace; others to Spenser; but not one of them, if we except the reply to
Marlow, has been ever supposed to be Raleighs: To whom if you had not been
generously pleased to give the Imitation you mention, it might have remained in
want of an owner till doomsday. Of this discovery, therefore, your profound
sagacity may safely claim the sole credit.

P. 448.

"As a peotical novel of Greece, it will not be improper to mention here, the
Clitophon and Leucippe of Achilles Tatius." Pray, what do you mean by calling
this a POETICAL novel? Both the original and the translation (neither of which,
it is probable, you have ever seen, or know any thing about) are in downright
prose.

P. 470.

"He [Boccace] was soon imitated -- by many of his countrymen, Poggio,
Bandello, the anonymous author of LE CIENTO NOVELLE ANTIKE, Clinthio,
Firenzuola, Malespini, and others." Not to enquire how an author can be "SOON
imitated" by those who are not born till near a couple of centuries after him,
I would be glad to know where you, Mr. Warton, discovered that Boccace was
"imitated" by the compiler of the Novelle Antike (whom you have, doubtless,
sufficient authority for placing after Bndello), as I am given to understand
that the Italian literati universally believe, not only that he was, at least,
contemporary with Boccace, but also that his tales are of much higher
antiquity; indeed, the earlyest compositions of this sort the Italians have.

P. 475.

"In Shakespeare's Much ado about nothing, Beatrice suspects she shall be
toldshe had "her good wit out of the Hundred merry tales." This is just as
accurate as every other extract or allusion is throughout the work. She does
NOT suspect that she SHALL BE told so for Benedick has ALREADY whispered her
that some one had actually said so of her. I was rather surprised that you had
not taken more particular notice of the passage, when I found that, according
to your usual and laudable custom, you had been pecking and pilfering from Mr.
Steevenses note upon it: whence, I see, you got your report that the Cent
nouvelles nouvelles were written by some of the royal family of France: But I
am afraid that the ingenious commentator confounded this work with a quite
different one, -- the Queen of Navarres Tales.

P. 476.

"Among Mr. Oldys's books was the "Life of Sir Meliado a British knight,"
translated from the Italian, in 1572. By the way, we are not here to suppose
that BRITISH means ENGLISH. A BRITISH knight means a knight of BRETAGNE or
BRITANNY, in France. This is a common mistake, arising from an equivocation
which has converted many a French knight into an Englishman. The learned
Nicholas Antonio, in his SPANISH LIBRARY, affords a remarkable example of this
confusion, and a proof of its frequency, where he is speaking of the Spanish
translation of the romance of TIRANTE THE WHITE, in 1480. Ad fabularum
artificem stylum convertimus, Joannem Martorell Valentiae regni civem, cujus
est liber hujus commatis, TIRANT LE BLANCH inscriptus, atque anno 1480, ut
aiunt, Valentiae in folio editus. More hic aliorum talium otiosorum consueto,
fingit se librum ex ANGLICA in Lusitanam, deinde Lusitana in Valentinam
linguam, anno, 1460, transtulisse, etc. That is, I now turn to a writer of
fabulous adventures, John Martorell of the kingdom of Valencia, who wrote a
book of this cast, entitled TIRANTE the WHITE, printed in folio at Valencia You
cannot even translate the simplest passage with common honesty. Antonio does
not assert, that the book was ACTUALLY PRINTED at Valencia in that year; he
only says, IT WAS REPORTED SO: And the report was false.
in 1480. This writer, according to a practice common to such idle historians,
pretends he translated this book from English into Portugueze, and from thence
into the Valencian language. The hero is a gentleman of BRETAGNE, and the book
was FIRST WRITTEN IN THE LANGUAGE OF THAT COUNTRY. I take this opportunity of
observing, that these mistakes of ENGLAND for BRITANNY, tend to confirm MY
HYPOTHESIS, that Bretagne, or Armorica, was anciently a copious source of
romance: an hypothesis, which I have the happiness to find was the opinion of
the most learned and ingenious M. La Croze. etc. -- (p. 447.) "OUR KING ARTHUR
was sometimes called ARTHUR of LITTLE BRITTAYNE, and there is a romance with
that title, reprinted in 1609."

I trouble you, Mr. Warton, with this long extract, because it is so very
interesting, and I have such a great deal to say to you upon it, that nothing
less, perhaps, would have answered either your purpose or mine.

Though I never met with the "LIFE OF SIR MELIADO," nor with any other notice
of it, I must be content to suppose it to have actually been where you say it
was. But you ought, certainly, to have been better acquainted with it before
you had so peremptoryly decided upon the meaning of the word "BRITISH," which,
with equal absurdity and presumption, you would confine to BRETAGNE or Britany
in France. To be sure, you are rather got into your Irish style when you
attempt to prove that BRITISH does NOT mean ENGLISH, as no one, I believe,
excepting yourself, could possibly have imagined that it did. It is, at the
same time, very curious, to find a person, who either is, or pretends to be, a
scholar, hardyly contending that this country was never called BRITAIN, nor its
inhabitants BRITISH! That the sun gives no light, and the night brings no
darkness! The notion is, in the utmost degree, contemptible and absurd. Armorica
was by the French called LA PETITE BRETAGNE, by us, LITTLE BRITAIN, merely to
distinguish it from the island of GREAT BRITAIN, by the styled LA GRANDE
BRETAGNE. The name BRITISH may, for aught I know, be common to both countries,
but I firmly believe the inhabitants of BRITANY were never so called, much less
distinguished, by any writer, English of foreign, before the sagacious Mr.
Warton If there be any such book as "The Life of Sir Meliado," it is, without
doubt, the romance of MELIADUS DE LEONNOIS, a petty king in GREAT BRITAIN, and
one of the knights of the Round Table; whose story was translated out of French
into Italian, and printed at Venice in 1558 and 1559, in two volumes octavo.
. But, let the word BRITISH mean what it will, how does it connect with or
apply to the quotation from Nicholas Antonio? He says nothing at all about
BRITISH; he expressly tells us, that Martorell pretended to have translated the
romance of Tirante, "EX ANGLICA," out of ENGLISH. I have not, in the whole
course of this strange history, been astonished at anything more than at your
assertion that "the hero is a gentleman of BRETAGNE." Because I can only
conclude it to be a guess; and it happens to be as lucky as it was bold. You
are not quite so fortunate, however, in your equally dogmatical position, that
"the book was FIRST WRITTEN IN THE LANGUAGE OF THAT COUNTRY:" than which
nothing can be more insupportable, more ill-grounded, or more false. I must,
indeed, confess, that it was not without reason you concluded every one to be
as ignorant about the matter as yourself; and that you might safely advance
whatever you chose without the smallest fear of detection. But, alas! how
miserably have you been deceived! John or Joanot Martorell, the author of the
above romance of TIRANT LO BLANCH (which, by the way, was not printed at
Valencia in 1480, but at Barcelona in 1497, and no where else during the 15th
century) in his dedication thereof to Don Ferdinand, prince of Portugal, and
duke of Viseo, brother of Alphonsus V. and then ( sci. in 1460) presumptive
heir to the crown, to which his son Emanuel afterward succeeded, positively
declares, that the history and acts of the said TIRANT were written in the
English tongue, "EN LENGUA ANGLESA;" that he had TRANSLATED them out of THAT
LANGUAGE into PORTUGUESE, at the direct instance of the above prince, who
thought, that, as he (Martorell) had been sometime in England, " EN LA ILLA DE
ANGLETERRA In the suite, perhaps, of Peter duke of Coimbra, one of the sons of
John I. who was here in the third year of king Henry VI. (1425) at whose court
he was magnificently entertained, and made a knight of the Garter: An honor
which Martorell has conferred upon the hero of his romance, whom he supposes to
be the first that received it. As to prince Ferdinand, though he might never be
in England, it is not improbable that he understood something of the language;
being grandson of Philippa, sister of our Henry IV. and wife of the above John.
He dyed in 1471, aged thirty; so that he could not well have been more than
nineteen when he imposed the task of this translation upon Martorell.
, he would know the tongue better than others; that he had since translated the
book out of Portuguese into his native dialect the VALENCIAN He only lived, it
appears, to finish the three first books; the fourth and last part is said to
be translated "a pregaries de la noble senyora dona ysabel de loric, per lo
magnifich caualler mossen marti iohau de galba."
; and apologizes for the defects of his version, as being in some measure
occasioned by the peculiar difficulties of the English language, which he had,
in many places, found it impracticable to translate. But, as you appear to
understand Valencian See before, p. 30.
, I shall give you his own words: "Car si d'faliments algu^s hi son certament
senyor nes en part causa da dita LENGUA A^GLESA de la qual en algunes partides
es inpossible poder be girar los vocables." It is strange enough, that an
author, more especially of Martorells consequence, who is styled "lo magnifich
e virtuos cavaller," should have the considence to impose upon his patron not
only a feigned original, but a feigned command to translate it, and an
imaginary translation too. This is an enigma we cannot at present solve. It is
not impossible, however, that Martorell might actually pick up some part of his
subject during his residence in England. What makes this conjecture the less
improbable is the use he has made of the story of "Comte gillem de uaroych",
(Guy of Warwick) which we know to have been then extant in English. The origin
of THE GARTER, the magnificent celebration of the nuptials of the king of
England (alluding, most likely, to those of Richard II.) with the king of
France's daughter, and some few other particulars, he may, undoubtedly, have
got here: Though one might, perhaps, be led to think that he has derived his
principal information on these heads from old Froissart, a favorite historian
during the continuance of chivalry. But, independent of his own assertions, the
venial deceits of a romantic age, there is the strongest and most conclusive
evidence, as well intrinsic as extrinsic, that Martorell, whether he wrote
first in Portuguese or Valencian, was the original author. As to the work
itself, it is a most ingenious and admirable performance, well deserving the
praises bestowed upon it by Cervantes See Don Quixote, p. 1. l. 1. c: 6. The
romance of Tirante was, early in the 16th century, translated into Castilian;
from thence into Italian, and about 30 or 40 years ago into French. The two
latter translators were entire strangers to the original, of which there is
not, perhaps, more than one single copy known to be extant.
, and much beyond any thing of the kind ever produced in England, or even (if
one dare venture to say it) capable of being so.

You will not desire me to take further notice of your assertion, that this
romance was first written in the language of Britany. I have, I think, said
enough to make you completely ashamed of yourself, if you have a particle of
modesty in your composition. But what credit, let me ask, is a reader to place
in the reveries and confident declarations of so ignorant, so false, and so
conceited a writer?

Your HYPOTHESIS, as you call it, is so false, so groundless, so visionary, and
absurd, that I am equally willing to believe it your own, and to leave you in
peacable possession of it. Neither have I any thing, at present, to say to "the
most learned and ingenious M. La Croze;" of whom I must with shame acknowledge,
I never before heared: If, therefore, it be such an amazing happyness to find
one single person in the whole world of the same opinion with yourself, enjoy
it.

That "our king Arthur" might be "sometimes called Arthur of Little:
Brittayne," as he is supposed to have been king of both countries, is probable
enough, though I do not believe it. I am, however, ready to allow that "there
is a romance with that title," which may, for any thing I know to the contrary,
have been "reprinted in 1609." But they who told you that should, at the same
time, have informed you that Arthur of Little Britain, the hero of that
romance, is a very different person from king Arthur of Great Britain. And so
much for you, and your hypothesis.

P. 485.

The old version of TASSO, being registered by Ames, and at present existing,
to my knowledge, in more libraries than one, is no such mighty discovery as you
seem to flatter yourself. However, if you think its full title, and a specimen
of the translators poetical talents, worthy of a place in your next edition, if
your admirable history arrive at that honor, or even in the list of blunders,
-- "Emendations and additions," I should say, -- to Volume the third, you are
heartyly welcome to both. Only take care, I beseech you, and print them
correctly; and I shall space you the mortification of telling to whom you are
obliged.

"Godfrey of Bulloigne, or the Recovery of Jerusalem. An Heroical poem
written in Italian by Seig. Torquato Tasso, and translated into English by R.
C. Esquire: And now the first part containing five Cantos, Imprinted in both
Languages. London Imprinted by John Windet for Thomas Man dwelling in Pater
noster-Row." 410.

begin "I sing the goodly arms, and that Chieftaine
"Who great Sepulcher of our Lord did free,
"Much with his hand, much wrought he with his brain:
"Much in that glorious conquest suffered he:
"And hell in vain hitselfe opposde, in vain
"The mixed troops Asian and Libick flee
"To arms, for heaven him favored, and he drew
"To sacred ensigns his straid mates anew."


The Italian text is on the opposite page. And The Address, "To the Reader" is
dated "From Exeter the last of February, 1594." and signed "C. H." i. e.
Christopher Hunt, who seems to have been the proprietor of the edition, and
whose name, as it should appear from Ames, was prefixed to some copies instead
of Man's. R. C. it may be, is Richard Carew.

I have at length, Mr. Warton, completed my design of exposing to the public
eye a tolerable specimen of the numerous errors, falsities, and plagiarisms, of
which you have been guilty in the course of your celebrated History. And,
though I am conscious of having left considerable gleanings to any who may be
inclined to follow me, I trust I have given you much reason to be sorry, and
more to be ashamed: But whether my arguments will produce any such effects, I,
really, neither know, nor care.

Next to the civil history of a country, an account of its language,
literature, and poetry is, both to natives and strangers, the most interesting
and important subject that can be conceived. A subject which requires and
deserves the greatest talents and most unremiting industry. But this is a task
for which you, of all men who have ever pretended to write history, are the
least qualifyed. Your language, I confess, is easy and elegant; but your
indolence in collecting and examining materials; and, beyond every thing, your
ignorance of the subject, should have prevented you from engaging in a work of
such great and general consequence; in which, whatever might be your progress,
how uninformed soever you might esteem the bulk of your readers, you were
certain, at last, of encountering detection and disgrace. You have entitled
your performance the HISTORY of English Poetry. It is the extreme of hyperbole,
and a gross insult to common sense! Could you flatter yourself that your
calling it a HISTORY would induce the public to accept it for one. Alas! what
do they perceive, but an injudicious farrago, a gallimawfry of things which
both do and do not belong to the subject, thrown and jumbled together, without
system, arrangement, or perspicuity: -- a dark
Illimitable ocean, without bound,
Without dimension, where length, breadth, and highth,
And time and place are lost!
The reader is bewildered in mazes; he turns round and round; and wanders
backward and foreward, and foreward and backward, and at last finds hisself
just where he set out, heartyly tired, and without anything to console him for
the tediousness and labor of the journey; -- unless he can pick a flower or
two (for flowers there certainly are) from amongst the numerous weeds and
briars which intercept his passage, and entangle his footsteps. Want of method,
however, is the least fault of which you can be accused. If your collections
had been authentic, though of theirselves no history, nor capable, in your
hands, of becoming one, they might at least have been useful to some subsequent
writer better qualifyed for the purpose. But we see (as has been here
sufficiently proved) you are not to be relied on in a single instance; the work
being a continued tissue of falsehood from beginning to end. Suffer me, as a
friend, -- to your subject, at least, -- to recommend it to you, to take all
the advice and assistance you can get from the most able literary characters
who may be willing to render you either, and immediately set abous a diligent
revisal and correction I would likewise wish you to be convinced of another
fault which ought to be carefully rooted out; I mean your fulsome and
disgusting Egotism. There is some difference between the History of English
Portry, and the Life and Opinions of Thomas Warton.
of your three volumes already published, deferring the remainder of the work
till it be worthy of the light; do justice to those writers to whom you have
been actually indebted; and omit that which is unnecessary, and which you have,
from the vilest motive, inserted merely to extend and enlarge the work; even
if, by so doing, your three volumes should be reduced to two: That the work may
not remain a monument of disgrace to yourself and your country. Of all men
living, the learned and intelligent editor of The CANTERBURY TALES is the best
able to afford you the requisite help; and, surely, in a matter of such
universal concern, if you apply to him with sincerity, he will not withhold it.
His publication of Chaucer is the most erudite, curious and valuable
performance that (excepting only that mine of literary treasure Dr. Hickeses
Thesaurus, which never had, nor ever will have, its equal) has yet appeared in
this country. I do not, however, mean to pronounce it entirely faultless: It
undoubtedly contains some mistakes Such as his supposing Chaucers lines to
contain eleven syllables; an idea as just as that 3 and 3 make 7: -- his
adopting and misspelling certain words contrary to the evidence of all the MSS.
he consulted: -- a few erroneous notions with respect to Chaucers language, and
the nature and history of the English tongue: -- with some others, perhaps, of
still less consequence: From all which, however, it is to be wished so
excellent a work were totally freed
; but they are very few; and, being chiefly confined to matter of opinion, will
be thought rather trifleing than important, rather innocent than dangerous.
Even the errors of SUCH MEN are entitled to respect. And, for the later periods
of our literary history, who is there so well informed, so judicious, or so
liberal, as the worthy and amiable writer of the "Essay on the Learning of
Shakespeare?" Thus assisted, Mr. Warton, you might, probably, render your work,
in reality, what you have had the modesty to entitle it. Not that I have, after
all, the slightest expectation of your taking any further trouble about the
matter; unless, indeed, the sale of the revised work should appear likely to
produce you some considerable advantage. However, you are equally obliged to me
for my good advice, whether you embrace it or not. And as I am satisfied that
you will continue to write upon the subject, so long as you can find materials,
however, flimsy, or purchasers, however simple, I beg leave to recommend to a
respectable department in your seventh volume, or rather to a volume or two of
its own, a Virgin Article for which I have highest regard: -- The Poetical
Annals of the British Nursery: -- With two learned Differtations -- I. On the
origin and use of the ancient Lullabies; II. On the GESTA ROMANORUM of the
Nursery -- Mother Goose's Tales. You could not reasonably desire a more ample
field for the display of your amazing erudition in all its branches. Your
"episode" (and the more "disproportionate" it is, the better) on a theater,
which, as you very justly observe, is "of the lowest species, and the highest
antiquity," will be allowed to comprehend the whole history of the genuine mode
of scenic representiation, from Thespis to Flockton; interspersed with a
variety of surprising observations, and unheared of facts. These will eke out
many a loose and easy page; while your disquisitions upon Puerile Architecture,
or the art of constructing Castles of Cards, will not only involve the rise,
progress, and grand arcana of Free-masonry, which are all comprised in this
curious and antique process, but give you, at the same time, a fine opportunity
of exhibiting your whole fund of knowledge in the science, of which you have
induced us to believe that you are perfect master; and by not writing, at least
not publishing, your promised work, have been wise enough not to undeceive us.
One cannot easyly imagine a more pleasing or fruitful subject, nor a historian
better qualifyed to do it justice; unless, indeed, your want of fidelity and
care may be thought an insuperable objection: But I am not without hope that
even the present address will have the good fortune to make you a little more
cautious on those heads in your future lucubrations.

I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient, and most humble servant.


