MISCELLANIES IN VERSE and PROSE.

BY ALEXANDER POPE, Esquire and Dean SWIFT.

In One VOLUME.

VIZ. The strange and deplorable Frensy of Mr. John Dennis. A full and true
Account of a horrid and barbarous Revenge, by Poison, on the Body of Mr. Edmund
Curll. With his Last Will and Testament. A strange, but true Relation how
Edmund Curll was converted from the Christian Religion, by certain Jews, and
how he was circumcised. God's Revenge against Punning. The wonderful Wonder of
Wonders. The Wonder of all the Wonders, that ever the World wondered at. The
humble Petition of the Colliers, Cook Maids, Blacksmiths, Jack-makers,
Brasiers, and others. Annus Mirabilis. Origin of Sciences. It cannot Rain, but
it Pours; or, London strewn with Rarities. An infallible Scheme to pay the
Public Debt of Ireland, in Six Months. A modest Proposal. A Vindication of my
Lord Carteret Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. On the Fates of Clergymen. On modern
Education. A true and faithful Narrative of what passed in London. Journal of a
modern Lady. Country Life. Cutting down the old Thorn at Market-hill. A
Pastoral Dialogue. Mary the Cook Maid's Letter to Dr. Sheridan. A Dialogue
between Mad Mullineux and Timothy. Epitaph on Francis Ch^is. Soldier and
Scholar. With several more Epigrams, Epitaphs, and Poems.


LONDON: Printed for JOHN THOMAS, near St. Paul's. M.DCC.XLIV.

THE BOOKSELLERS ADVERTISEMENT.
OF the following Volume, we need only say, that it contains the Remainder of
those Miscellaneous Pieces, which were in some sort promised in the Preface to
the former Volumes, or which have been written since. The Verses are paged
separately, that they may be added to that Volume which wholly consists of
Verse, and the Treatise of the Bathos placed in their stead in This. The Reader
may be assured no other Edition is either Genuine or Complete, and that they
are all the Things of this Kind which will ever be Printed by the same Hands.

There are in this Volume, as in the former, one or two small pieces by other
Hands.

THE NARRATIVE OF Dr. Robert Norris, CONCERNING The Strange and Deplorable
FRENZY of Mr. J^N D^IS, an Officer of the Custom-house.
IT is an acknowledged Truth, that nothing is so dear to an honest Man as his
good Name, nor ought he to neglect the just Vindication of his Character, when
it is injuriously attacked by any Man. The Person I have at present Cause to
complain of, is indeed in very melancholy Circumstances, it having pleased God
to deprive him of his Senses, which may extenuate the Crime in Him. But I
should be wanting in my Duty, not only to my self, but also to my
Fellow Creatures, to whom my Talents may prove of benefit, should I suffer my
Profession or Honesty to be undeservedly aspersed. I have therefore resolved to
give the Public an account of all that has past between that unhappy Gentleman
and my self.

On the 20 th instant, while I was in my Closet pondering the Case of one of my
Patients, I heard a Knocking at my Door, upon opening of which entered an old
Woman with Tears in her Eyes, and told me, that without my Assistance her
Master would be utterly ruined. I was forced to interrupt her Sorrow by
enquiring her Master's Name and Place of Abode. She told me he was one Mr. D^is
an Officer of the Custom-house, who was taken ill of a violent Frenzy last
April, and had continued in those melancholy Circumstances, with few or no
Intervals. Upon this I asked her some Questions relating to his Humor and
Extravagancies, that I might the better know under what Regimen to put him,
when the Cause of his Distemper was found out. Alas, Sir, says she, this Day
fortnight in the Morning a poor simple Child came to him from the Printer's;
the Boy had no sooner entered the Room, but he cried out, the Devil was come.
He often stares ghastfully, raves aloud, and mutters between his Teeth the Word
Cator, or Cato, or some such thing. Now, Doctor, this Cator is certainly a
Witch, and my poor Master is under an evil Tongue: for I have heard him say
Cator has bewitched the whole Nation. It pitied my very Heart, to think that a
Man of my Master's Understanding and great Scholarship, (who, as the Child told
me, had a Book of his own in Print,) should talk so outragiously. Upon this I
went and laid out a Groat for a Horshoe, which is at this time nailed on the
Threshold of his Door; but I don't find my Master is at all the better for it;
he prepetually starts and runs to the Window when any one knocks, crying out,
S' death! a Messenger from the French King! I shall die in the Bastile.

Having said this, the Old Woman presented me with a Viol of his Urine; upon
Examination of which I preceiv'd the whole Temperament of his Body to be
exceeding hot. I therefore instantly took my Cane and my Beaver, and repaired
to the Place where he dwelt.

When I came to his Lodgings near Charing Cross, up three Pair of Stairs,
(which I should not have published in this manner, but that this Lunatic
conceals the Place of his Residence on purpose to prevent the good Offices of
those charitable Friends and Physicians, who might attempt his Cure) when I
came into the Room, I found this unfortunate Gentleman seated on his Bed, with
Mr. Bernard Lintott, Bookseller, on the one side of him, and a grave elderly
Gentleman on the other, who, as I have since learnt, calls himself a
Grammarian; the Latitude of whose Countenance was not a little eclipsed by the
Fullness of his Peruke. As I am a black lean Man, of a pale Visage, and hang my
Clothes on somewhat slovenly, I no sooner went in but he frowned upon me, and
cried out with violence, ' God's Death, a Frenchman! I am betrayed to the Tyrant!
who could have thought the Queen would have delivered me up to France in this
Treaty, and least of all that you, my Friends, would have been in a Conspiracy
against me?' -- Sir, said I, here is neither Plot nor Conspiracy, but for your
advantage. The Recovery of your Senses requires my Attendance, and your Friends
sent for me on no other account. I then took a particular Survey of his Person,
and the Furniture and Disposition of his Apartment. His Aspect was furious, his
Eyes were rather fiery than lively, which he rolled about in an uncommon
manner. He often opened his Mouth, as if he would have uttered some Matter of
Importance, but the Sound seemed lost inwardly. His Beard was grown, which they
told me he would not suffer to be shaved, believing the modern Dramatick Poets
had corrupted all the Barbers in the Town to take the first Opportunity of
cutting his Throat. His Eyebrows were gray, long, and grown together, which he
knit with Indignation when any thing was spoken, insomuch that he seemed not to
have smoothed his Forehead for many Years. His Flannel Night Cap, which was
exceedingly begrim'd with Sweat and Dirt, hung upon his Left Ear; the Flap of
his Breeches dangled between his Legs, and the Rolls of his Stockings fell down
to his Ankles.

I observed his Room was hung with old Tapestry, which had several Holes in it,
caused, as the Old Woman informed me, by his having cut out of it the Heads of
diverse Tyrants, the Fierceness of whose Visages had much provoked him. On all
sides of his Room were pinned a great many Sheets of a Tragedy called Cato,
with Notes on the Margin with his own Hand. The Words Absurd, Monstrous,
Execrable, were every where written in such large Characters, that I could read
them without my Spectacles. By the Fre-side lay Three-farthings-worth of
Small-coal in a Spectator, and behind the Door huge Heaps of Papers of the same
Title, which his Nurse informed me she had conveyed thither out of his sight,
believing they were Books of the Black Art; for her Master never read in them,
but he was either quite mop'd, or in raving Fits; There was nothing neat in the
whole Room, except some Books on his Shelves very well bound and gilded, whose
Names I had never before heard of, nor I believe are any where else to be
found; such as Gibraltar, a Comedy; Remarks on Prince Arthur; the Grounds of
Criticism in Poetry; an Essay on public Spirit. The only one I had any
Knowledge of was a Paradise Lost, interleav'd. The whole Floor was covered with
Manuscripts, as thick as a Pastry Cook's Shop on a Christmas Eve. On his Table
were some Ends of Verse and of Candles; a Gallipot of Ink with a yellow Pen in
it, and a Pot of half-dead Ale covered with a Longinus.

As I was casting my Eyes round on all this odd Furniture with some Earnestness
and Astonishment, and in a profound Silence, I was on a sudden surpised to
hear the Man speak in the following manner:

"Beware, Doctor, that it fare not with you as with your Predecessor the famous
Hippocrates, whom the mistaken Citizens of Abdera sent for in this very manner
to cure the Philosopher Democritus; he returned full of Admiration at the
Wisdom of that Person whom he had supposed a Lunatic. Behold, Doctor, it was
thus Aristotle himself and all the great Ancients spent their Days and Nights,
wrapped up in Criticism, and beset all around with their own Writings. As for me,
whom you see in the same manner, be assured I have none other Disease than a
Swelling in my Legs, whereof I say no more, since your Art may further certify
you."

I began now to be in hopes that his Case had been misrepresented, and that he
was not so far gone, but some timely Medicines might recover him. I therefore
proceeded to the proper Queries, which with the Answers made to me, I shall set
down in Form of Dialogue, in the very Words they were spoken, because I would
not omit the least Circumstance in this Narrative; and I call my Conscience to
witness, as if upon Oath, that I shall tell the Truth without addition or
diminution.

Doct. Pray, Sir, how did you contract this Swelling?


Denn. By a Criticism,


Doct. A Criticism! that is a Distemper I never read of.


Denn. God's Death, Sir, a Distemper! It is no Distemper, but a Noble Art. I have
sat fourteen Hours a Day at it; and are you a Doctor, and don't know there is a
Communication between the Legs and the Brain?


Doct. What made you sit so many Hours, Sir?


Denn. Cato, Sir.


Doct. Sir, I speak of your Distemper, what gave you this Tumor?


Denn. Cato, Cato, Cato. Remarks on Cato, published by Mr. D. in the Year, 1712.



Old Wom. For God's sake, Doctor, name not this evil Spirit, it is the whole
Cause of his Madness: Alas, poor Master's just falling into his Fits.


Mr. Lintott. Fits! Z^ what Fits! A Man may well have Swellings in his Legs,
that sits writing fourteen Hours in a Day. He got this by the Remarks.


Doct. The Remarks! what are those?


Denn. God's Death! have you never read my Remarks? I will be damned if this Dog
Lintott ever published my Advertisements.


Mr. Lint. Z^! I published Advertisement upon Advertisement; and if the Book be
not read, it is none of my fault, but his that made it. By G^, as much has been
done for the Book, as could be done for any Book in Christendom.


Doct. We do not talk of Books, Sir; I fear those are the Fuel that feed his
Delirium; mention them no more. You do very ill to promote this Discourse.

I desire a Word in private with this other Gentleman, who seems a grave and
sensible Man: I suppose, Sir, you are his Apothecary.


Gent. Sir, I am his Friend.


Dr. I doubt it not. What Regimen have you observed since he has been under
your Care? You remember, I suppose, the Passage of Celsus, which says, if the
Patient, on the third Day, have an Interval, suspend the Medicaments at Night?
let Fumigations be used to corroborate the Brain; I hope you have upon no
Account promoted Sternutation by Hellebore.


Gent. Sir, no such matter, you utterly mistake.


Dr. Mistake: Am I not a Physician? and shall an Apothecary dispute my Nostrums
-- You may perhaps have filled up a Prescription or two of Ratcliff's which
chanced to succeed, and with that very Prescription injudiciously prescribed to
different Constitutions, have destroyed a Multitude. Pharmacopola componat,
Medicus solus prescribat. Fumigate him, I say, this very Evening, while he is
relieved by an Interval.


Denn. God's Death, Sir, my Friend an Apothecary! a base Mechanic! He who, like my
self, professes the noblest Sciences in the Universe, Criticism and Poetry. Can
you think I would submit my Writings to the Judgment of an Apothecary! By the
Immortals, he himself inserted three whole Paragraphs in my Remarks, had a Hand
in my Public Spirit, nay, assisted me in my Description of the Furies, and
infernal Regions in my Appius.


Mr. Lintott. He is an Author; you mistake the Gentleman, Doctor, he has been
an Author these twenty Years, to his Bookseller's Knowledge, and no Man's else.


Denn. Is all the Town in a Combination? Shall Poetry fall to the Ground? Must
our Reputation be lost to all foreign Countries? O Destruction! Perdition! He
wrote a Treatise proving the Decay of Public Spirit to proceed from Italian
Opera's.
Opera! Opera! As Poetry once raised Cities, so when Poetry fails Cities are
overturned, and the World is no more.


Dr. He raves, he raves; Mr. Lintott, I pray you pinion down his Arms, that he
may do no Mischief.


Denn. O I am sick, sick to Death!


Dr. That is a good Symptom, a very good Symptom. To be sick to Death (say the
modern Physicians) is an excellent Symptom. When a Patient is sensible of his
Pain, it is half a Cure. Pray, Sir, of what are you sick?


Denn. Of every thing, Of every thing. I am sick of the Sentiments of the
Diction, of the Protasis, of the Epitasis, and the Catastrophe -- Alas, what is
become of the Drama, the Drama?


Old Wom. The Dram, Sir? Mr. Lintott drank up all the Gin just now; but I Will go
fetch more presently!


Denn. O shameful Want, scandalous Omission! By all the Immortals, here is no
Peripaetia, no Change of Fortune in the Tragedy; Z^ no Change at all.


Old Wom. Pray, good Sir, be not angry, I Will fetch Change.


Dr. Hold your Peace, Woman, his Fit increases, good Mr. Lintott hold him.


Mr. Lintott. Plague on it! I am damnably afraid they are in the right of it,
and he is mad in earnest. If he should be really mad, who the Devil will buy
the Remarks?


[Here Mr. Lintott scratched his Head.] Doct. Sir, I shall order you the cold
Bath to morrow -- Mr. Lintott, you are a sensible Man; pray send for Mr.
Verdier's Servant, and as you are a friend to the Patient, be so kind as to
stay this Evening whilst he is cupp'd on the Head. The Symptoms of his Madness
seem to be desperate; for Avicen says, that if Learning be mixed with a Brain
that is not of a Contexture fit to receive it, the Brain ferments till it be
totally exhausted. We must eradicate these undigested Ideas out of the
Perecranium, and reduce the Patient to a competent Knowledge of himself.


Denn. Caitiffs stand off, unhand me, Misoreants! Is the Man whose whole
Endeavors are to bring the Town to Reason mad? is the Man who settles Poetry
on the Basis of Antiquity mad? Dares any one assert there is a Peripaetia in
that vile Piece that is foisted upon the Town for a Dramatick Poem? That Man is
mad, the Town is mad, the World is mad. See Longinus in my right Hand, and
Aristotle in my left; I am the only Man among the Moderns that support them. Am
I to be assassinated; and shall a Bookseller, who has lived upon my Labors,
take away that Life to which he owes his Support?


Gent. By your Leave, Gentlemen, I apprehend you not. I must not see my Friend
ill treated; he is no more affected with Lunacy than my self: I am also of the
same Opinion as to the Peripaetia -- Sir, by the Gravity of your Countenance
and Habit, I would conceive you to be a graduate Physician; but by your
indecent and boisterous Treatment of this Man of Learning, I perceive you are a
violent sort of Person, I am loath to say Quack, who rather than his Drugs
should lie upon his own Hands, would get rid of them, by cramming them into the
Mouths of others: The Gentleman is of good Condition, sound Intellectuals, and
unerring Judgment: I beg you will not oblige me to resent these Proceedings.


THESE were all the Words that passed among us at this Time; nor was there need
for more, it being necessary we should make use of Force in the Cure of my
Patient.

I privately whispered the old Woman to go to Mr. Verdier's in Long-Acre, with
Orders to come immediately with Cupping Glasses; in the mean time, by the
Assistance of Mr. Lintott, we locked his Friend into a Closet, (who it is plain
from his last Speech was likewise touched in his Intellects) after which we
bound our Lunatic Hand and Foot down to the Bedsted, where he continued in
violent Ravings, notwithstanding the most tender Expressions we could use to
persuade him to submit to the Operation, till the Servant of Verdier arrived.
He had no sooner clapped half a dozen Cupping Glasses on his Head, and behind
his Ears, but the Gentleman abovementioned bursting open the Closet, ran
furiously upon us, cut Mr. D^is's Bandages, and let drive at us with a vast
Folio, which sorely bruised the Shin of Mr. Lintott; Mr. John D^is also
starting up with the Cupping Glasses on his Head, seized another Folio, and
with the same dangerously wounded me in the Skull, just above my right Temple.
The Truth of this Fact Mr. Verdier's Servant is ready to attest upon Oath, who,
taking an exact Survey of the Volumes, found that which wounded my Head to be
Gruterus's Lampas Critica, and that which broke Mr. Lintott's Shin was
Scaliger's Poetices. After this, Mr. John D^is strengthened at once by Rage and
Madness, snatched up a Peruke-Block, that stood by the Bedside, and weilded it
round in so furious a Manner, that he broke three of the Cupping Glasses from
the Crown of his Head, so that much Blood trickled down his Visage -- He looked
so ghastly, and his Passion was grown to such a prodigious Height, that my
self, Mr. Lintott, and Verdier's Servant were obliged to leave the Room in all
the Expedition imaginable.

I took Mr. Lintott home with me, in order to have our Wounds dressed, and laid
hold of that Opportunity of entering into Discourse with him about the Madness
of this Person, of whom he gave me the following remarkable Relation:

That on the 17th of May, 1712, between the Hours of 10 and 11 in the Morning,
Mr. John D^is entered into his Shop, and opening one of the Volumes of the
Spectator, in the large Paper, did suddenly, without the least Provocation,
tear out that of No -- where the Author treats of Poetical Justice, and cast it
into the Street. That the said Mr. John D^is on the 27 th of March, 1712,
finding on the said Mr. Lintott's Counter a Book called an Essay on Criticism,
just then published, he read a Page or two with much Frowning, till coming to
these two Lines; Some have at first for Wits, then Poets past,
Turned Ctiticks next, and proved plain Fools at last.
He flung down the Book in a terrible Fury, and cried out, By G^d he means Me.

That being in his Company on a certain Time, when Shakespeare was mentioned as
of a contrary Opinion to Mr. Dennis, he swore the said Shakespeare was a Rascal,
with other defamatory Expressions, which gave Mr. Lintott a very ill Opinion of
the said Shakespeare.

That about two Months since, he came again into the Shop, and cast several
suspicious Looks on a Gentleman that stood by him, after which he desired some
Information concerning that Person. He was no sooner acquainted that the
Gentleman was a new Author, and that his first Piece was to be published in a
few Days, but he drew his Sword upon him, and had not my Servant luckily
caught him by the Sleeve, I might have lost one Author upon the spot, and
another the next Sessions.

Upon recollecting all these Circumstances, Mr. Lintott was entirely of
Opinion, that he had been mad for some Time; and I doubt not but this whole
Narrative must sufficiently convince the World of the excess of his Frenzy. It
now remains, that I give the Reasons which obliged me in my own Vindication to
publish this whole unfortunate Transaction.

In the first place, Mr. John D^is had industriously caused to be reported that
I entered into his Room Vi and Armis, either out of a Design to deprive him of
his Life, or of a new Play called Cariolanus, which he has had ready for the
Stage these Four Years.

Secondly, He has given out about Fleetstreet and the Temple, that I was an
Accomplice with his Bookseller, who visited him with Intent to take away diverse
valuable Manuscripts, without paying him Copy-Money.

Thirdly, He has told others, that I am no Graduate Physician, and that he had
seen me upon a Mountebank Stage in Moorfields, when he had Lodgings in the
College there.

Fourthly, Knowing that I had much Practice in the City, he reported at the
Royal Exchange, Custom-house, and other Places adjacent, that I was a foreign
Spy, employed by the French King to convey him into France; that I bound him
Hand and Foot; and that, if his Friend had not burst from his Confinement to
his Relief, he had been at this Hour in the Bastile.

All which several Assertions of his are so very extravagant, as well as
inconsistent, that I appeal to all Mankind whether this Person be not out of
his Senses. I shall not decline giving and producing further Proofs of this
Truth in open Court, if he drives the Matter so far. In the mean time I
heartily forgive him, and pray that the Lord may restore him, to the full
Enjoyment of his Understanding: So wishes as becomes a Christian,

Robert Norris, M. D.
From my House on Snow-hill, July the 30th. 1713.
God Save the Queen.
A full and true ACCOUNT OF A Horrid and Barbarous REVENGE by POISON, On the
Body of Mr. EDMUND CURLL, Bookseller; With a faithful COPY of his Last WILL and
TESTAMENT
HISTORY furnishes us with Examples of many Satirical Authors who have fallen
Sacrifices to Revenge, but not of any Booksellers that I know of, except the
unfortunate Subject of the following Paper; I mean Mr. Edmund Curll, at the
Bible and Dial in Fleetstreet, who was yesterday poisoned by Mr. Pope, after
having lived many Years an Instance of the mild Temper of the British Nation.

Every Body knows that the said Mr. Edmund Curll, on Monday the 26th Instant,
published a Satirical Piece, entitled Court Poems, in the Preface whereof they
were attributed to a Lady of Quality, Mr. Pope, or Mr. Gay; by which indiscreet
Method though he had escaped one Revenge, there were still two behind in
reserve.

Now on the Wednesday ensuing, between the Hours of Ten and Eleven, Mr.
Lintott, a neighboring Bookseller, desired a Conference with Mr. Curll about
settling a Title Page, inviting him at the same Time to take a Whet together.
Mr. Pope, (who is not the only Instance how Persons of bright Parts may be
carried away by the Instigation of the Devil) found Means to convey himself
into the same Room, under Pretense of Business with Mr. Lintott, who it seems
is the Printer of his Homer. This Gentleman with a seeming Coolness,
reprimanded Mr. Curll for wrongfully ascribing to him the aforesaid Poems: He
excused himself by declaring that one of his Authors (Mr. Oldmixon by Name)
gave the Copies to the Press, and wrote the Preface. Upon this Mr. Pope (being
to all appearance reconciled) very civily drank a Glass of Sack to Mr. Curll,
which he as civilly pledged; and though the Liquor in Color and Taste differed
not from common Sack, yet was it plain by the Pangs this unhappy Stationer felt
soon after, that some poisonous Drug had been secretly infused therein.

About eleven a Clock he went home, where his Wife observing his Color
changed, said, Are you not Sick, my Dear? He replied, Bloody Sick; and
incontinently fell a vomiting and straining in an uncommon and unnatural
Manner, the Contents of his vomiting being as green as Grass. His Wife had been
just reading a Book of her Husband's printing concerning Jane Wenham, the
famous Witch of Hertford, and her Mind misgave her that he was bewitched; but
he soon let her know that he suspected Poison, and recounted to her, between
the Intervals of his Yawnings and Reachings, every Circumstance of his
Interview with Mr. Pope.

Mr. Lintott in the mean time coming in, was extremely affrighted at the sudden
Alteration he observed in Him: Brother Curll, says he, I fear you have got the
Vomiting Distemper; which (I have heard) kills in half an Hour. This comes from
your not following my Advice, to drink old Hock in a Morning, as I do, and
abstain from Sack, Mr. Curll replied in a moving Tone, Your Author's Sack I
fear has done my Business, Z^ds, says Mr. Lintott, my Author! -- Why did not
you drink old Hock? Notwithstanding which rough Remonstrance, he did in the
most friendly Manner press him to take warm Water; but Mr. Curll did with great
Obstinacy refuse it; which made Mr. Lintott Infer, that he chose to die, as
thinking to recover greater Damages.

All this Time the Symptoms increased violently, with accute Pains in the lower
Belly. Brother Lintott, says he, I perceive my last Hour approaching; do me the
friendly Office to call my Partner, Mr. Pemberton, that we may settle our
Worldly Affairs. Mr. Lintott, like a kind Neighbor was hastening out of the
Room, while Mr. Curll raved aloud in this manner: If I survive this, I will be
revenged on Tonson; it was he first detected me as the Printer of these Poems,
and I will reprint these very Poems in his Name. His Wife admonished him not to
think of Revenge, but to take care of his Stock and his Soul: And in the same
Instant, Mr. Lintott (whose Goodness can never be enough applauded) returned
with Mr. Pemberton. After some Tears jointly shed by these humane Booksellers,
Mr. Curll being (as he said) in his perfect Senses though in great bodily Pain,
immediately proceeded to make a verbal Will (Mrs. Curll having first put on his
Nightcap) in the following Ma nner.

GEntlemen, in the first Place, I do sincerely pray Forgiveness for those
indirect Methods I have pursued in inventing new Titles to old Books, putting
Authors Names to things they never saw, publishing private Quarrels for public
Entertainment; all which, I hope will be pardoned, as being done to get an
honest livelihood.

I do also heartily beg Pardon of all Persons of Honor, Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, Gentry, Burgesses, and Commonalty, to whose Abuse I have any or every
way contributed by my Publications, particularly, I hope it will be considered,
that if I have vilify'd his Grace the Duke of Marlborough, I have likewise
aspersed the late Duke of Ormond; if I have abused the honorable Mr. Walpole,
I have also libelled the Lord Bolingbroke? so that I have preserved that
Equality and Impartiality which becomes an honest Man in Times of Faction and
Division.

I call my Conscience to witness, that many of these Things which may seem
malicious were done out of Charity; I having made it wholly my business to
print for poor disconsolate Authors, whom all other Booksellers refuse. Only
God bless Sir Richard Blackmore! you know he takes no Copy-money.

The second Collection of Poems, which I groundlesly called Mr. Prior's, will
sell for Nothing, and has not yet paid the Charge of the Advertisements, which
I was obliged to publish against him: Therefore you may as well suppress the
Edition, and beg that Gentleman's pardon in the name of a dying Christian.

The French Cato, with the Criticism showing how superior it is to Mr.
Addison's, (which I wickedly ascribed to Madam Dacier) may be suppressed at a
reasonable Rate, being damnably translated.

I protest I have no Animosity to Mr. Row, having printed part of Callipaedia,
and an incorrect Edition of his Poems without his Leave, in Quarto. Mr.
Gildon's Rehearsal or Bays the Younger, did more harm to me than to Mr. Row;
though upon the Faith of an honest Man, I paid him double, for abusing both him
and Mr. Pope.

Heaven pardon me for publishing the Trials of Sodomy in an Elzevir Letter! but
I humbly hope, my printing Sir Richard Blackmore's Essays will atone for them.
I beg that you will take what remains of these last, (which is near the whole
Impression, Presents excepted) and let my poor Widow have in exchange the sole
Propriety of the Copy of Madam Mascranny.

[ Here Mr. Pemberton interrupted, and would by no means consent to this
Article, about which some Dispute might have arisen unbecoming a dying Person,
if Mr. Lintott had not interposed and Mr. Curll vomited.]

What this poor unfortunate Man spoke afterward, was so indistinct, and in
such broken Accents, (being perpetually interrupted by Vomitings) that the
Reader is entreated to excuse the Confusion and Imperfection of this Account.

Dear Mr. Pemberton, I beg you to beware of the Indictment at Hicks's Hall, for
publishing Rochester's bawdy Poems; that Copy will otherwise be my best Legacy
to my dear Wife, and helpless Child.

The Case of Impotence was my best Support, all the last long Vacation.

[ In this last Paragraph Mr. Curll 's Voice grew more free, for his Vomitings
abated upon his Dejections, and he spoke what follows from his Closestool.]

For the Copies of Noblemen's and Bishop's Last Wills and Testaments, I
solemnly declare I printed them not with any Purpose of Defamation; but merely
as I thought those Copies lawfully purchased from Doctors Commons, at One
Shilling a piece. Our Trade in Wills turning to small Account, we may divide
them blindfold.

For Mr. Manwaring's Life, I ask Mrs. Oldfield's Pardon: Neither His nor my
Lord Halifax's Lives, though they were of service to their Country, were of any
to me: But I was resolved since I could not print their Works while they lived,
to print their Lives after they were dead.

While he was speaking these Words Mr. Oldmixon entered. Ah! Mr. Oldmixon (said
poor Mr. Curll) to what a Condition have your Works reduced me! I die a Martyr
to that unlucky Preface. However, in these my last Moments I will be just to
all Men; you shall have your third Share of the Court Poems, as was stipulated.
When I am dead, where will you find another Bookseller? Your Protestant Packet
might have supported you, had you writ a little less scurrilously; there is a
Mean in all things.

Here Mr. Lintott interrupted. Why not find another Bookseller, Brother Curll?
and then took Mr. Oldmixon aside and whispered him: Sir, As soon as Curll is
dead, I shall be glad to talk with you over a Pint at the Devil.

Mr. Curll now turning to Mr Pemberton, told him, he had several Taking
Title-Pages that only wanted Treatises to be wrote to them; and earnestly
desired that when they were writ, his Heirs might have some Share of the Profit
of them.

After he had said this, he fell into horrible Gripings, upon which Mr. Lintott
advised him to repeat the Lord's Prayer. He desired his Wife to step into the
Shop for a Common Prayer Book, and read it by the Help of a Candle without
Hesitation. He closed the Book, fetched a Groan, and recommended to Mrs. Curll
to give Forty Shillings to the Poor of the Parish of St. Dunstan's, and a
Week's Wages advance to each of his Gentlemen-Authors, with some small Gratuity
in particular to Mrs. Centlivre.

The poor Man continued for some Hours with all his disconsolate Family about
him in Tears, expecting his final Dissolution; when of a sudden he was
surprizingly relieved by a plentiful foetid Stool, which obliged them all to
retire out of the Room. Notwithstanding, it is judged by Sir Richard Blackmore,
that the Poison is still latent in his Body, and will infallibly destroy him by
slow Degrees, in less than a Month. It is to be hoped, the other Enemies of
this wretched Stationer will not further pursue their Revenge, or shorten this
small Period of his miserable Life.

A FURTHER ACCOUNT Of the most Deplorable Condition OF Mr. EDMUND CURLL,
Bookseller.
THE Public is already acquainted with the Manner of Mr. Curll's Impoisonment,
by a faithful though unpolite Historian of Grubstreet. I am but the Continuer of
his History; yet I hope a due Distinction will be made between an undignify'd
Scribler of a Sheet and half, and the Author of a Threepenny stitched Book,
like my self.

Blackmore's Essays, Vol. 1.
Wit (says Sir Richard Blackmore) proceeds from a Concurrence of regular and
exalted Ferments, and an Affluence of Animal Spirits rectified and refined to a
Degree of Purity. On the contrary, when the igneous Particles rise with the
vital Liquor, they produce an abstraction of the rational Part of the Soul,
which we commonly call Madness. The Verity of this Hypothesis, is justified by
the Symptoms with which the unfortunate Mr. Edmund Curll, Bookseller, has been
afficted ever since his swallowing the Poison at the Swan Tavern in
Fleetstreet. For though the Neck of his Retort, which carries up the Animal
Spirits to the Head, is of an extraordinary length; yet the said Animal Spirits
rise muddy, being contaminated with the inflammable Particles of this uncommon
Poison.

The Symptoms of his Departure from his usual Temper of Mind, were at first
only speaking civilly to his Customers, singeing a Pig with a new purchased
Libel, and refusing Two-and-Nine-Pence for Sir Richard Blackmore 's Essays.

As the poor Man's Frenzy increased, he began to void his Excrements in his
Bed, read Rochester 's bawdy Poems to his Wife, gave Oldmixon a slap on the
Chops, and would have kissed Mr. Pemberton's A^ by Violence.

But at last he came to such a pass, that he would dine upon nothing but
Copper Plates, took a Clyster for a whipped Syllabub, and made Mr. Lintott eat a
Suppository for a Raddish with Bread and Butter.

We leave it to every tender Wife to imagine, how sorely all this afflicted
poor Mrs. Curll: At first she privately put a Bill into several Churches,
desiring Prayers of the Congregation for a wretched Stationer distempered in
Mind. But when she was sadly convinced that his Misfortune was public to all
the World, she writ the following Letter to her good Neighbor Mr. Lintott. A
true Copy of Mrs. Curll's Letter to Mr. Lintott.
Worthy Mr. Lintott.
YOU, and all the Neighbors know too well, the Frenzy with which my poor Man
is visited. I never perceived he was out of himself till that melancholy Day
that he thought he was poisoned in a Glass of Sack; upon this, he ran a
Vomiting all over the House, nay, in the new-wash'd Dining Room. Alas! this is
the greatest Adversity that ever befell my poor Man, since he lost one Testicle
at School by the bite of a black Boar. Good Lord! if he should die, where
should I dispose of the Stock? unless Mr. Pemberton or you would help a
distressed Widow; for God knows he never publshed any Books that lasted above a
Week, so that if we wanted daily Books, we wanted daily Bread. I can write no
more, for I hear the Rap of Mr. Curll's Ivory-headed Cane upon the Counter. --
Pray recommend me to your Pastry-Cook, (who furnishes you yearly with Tarts in
exchange for your Papers) for Mr. Curll has disobliged ours, since his Fits
came upon him; -- before that, we generally lived upon baked Meats. -- He is
coming in, and I have but just time to put his Son out of the way for fear of
Mischief: So wishing you a merry Easter, I remain your

Most humble Servant, C. Curll.
P. S. As to the Report of my poor Husband's stealing a Calf, it is really
groundless, for he always binds in Sheep.






But return we to Mr. Curll, who all Wednesday continued outragiously mad. On
Thursday he had a lucid Interval, that enabled him to send a general Summons to
all his Authors. There was but one Porter who could perform this Office, to
whom he gave the following Bill of Directions where to find 'em. This Bill,
together with Mrs Curll's Original Letter, lie at Mr. Lintott's Shop to be
perused by the Curious.

Instructions to a Porter how to find Mr. Curll's Authors.
AT a Tallow-chandlers in Petty France, half way under the blind Arch: Ask for
the Historian.

At the Bedsted and Bolster, a Musick-house in Moresields, two Translators in a
Bed together.

At the Hercules and Still in Vinegar-yard, a Schoolmaster with Carbuncles on
his Nose.

At a Blacksmith's Shop in the Friars, a Pindarick Writer in red Stockings.

In the Calendar Mill Room at Exeter-Change, a Composer of Meditations.

At the Three Tobacco-Pipes in Dog and Bitch Yard, one that has been a Parson,
he wears a blue Camblet-coat trimmed with black: my best Writer against Revealed
Religion.

At Mr. Summers a Thief-catchers, in Lewkners Lane, the Man that wrote against
the Impiety of Mr. Rowe's Plays.

At the Farthing-Py-House in Tooting Fields, the young Man who is writing my
new Pastorals.

At the Laundresses, at the Hole in the Wall in Cursitors Alley, up three pair
of Stairs, the Author of my Church History -- if his Flux be over -- you may
also speak to the Gentleman who lies by him in the Flock Bed, my Index-maker.

The Cook's Wife in Buckingham Court; bid her bring along with her the Similies
that were lent her for her next new Play.

Call at Budge Row for the Gentleman you use to go to in the Cockloft; I have
taken away the Ladder, but his Landlady has it in keeping.

I don't much care if you ask at the Mint for the old Beetle-brow'd Critic,
and the purblind Poet at the Alley over against St. Andrews Holbourn. But this
as you have time.


All these Gentlemen appeared at the Hour appointed, in Mr. Curll's Dining
Room, two excepted; one of whom was the Gentleman in the Cockloft, his Landlady
being out of the way, and the Gradus ad Parnassum taken down; the other
happened to be too closely watched by the Bailiffs.

They no sooner entered the Room, but all of them showed in their Behavior
some Suspicion of each other; some turning away their Heads with an Air of
Contempt; others squinting with a Leer that showed at once Fear and
Indignation, each with a haggard abstracted Mien, the lively Picture of Scorn,
Solitude, and short Commons. So when a Keeper feeds his hungry Charge of
Vultures, Panthers, and of Lybian Leopards, each eyes his Fellow with a siery
Glare: High hung, the bloody Liver tempts their Maw. Or as a Housewife stands
before her Pales, surrounded by her Geese; they fight, they hiss, they gaggle,
beat their Wings, and Down is scattered as the Winter's Snow, for poor Grain of
Oat, or Tare, or Barley. Such Looks shot through the Room transverse, oblique,
direct; such was the stir and din, 'till Curll thus spoke, (but without rising
from his Close-stool.)

' Whores and Authors must be paid beforehand, to put them in good Humor;
therefore here is half a Crown a piece for you to drink your own Healths, and
Confusion to Mr. Addison, and all other successful Writers.'

'Ah Gentlemen! what have I not done, what have I not suffered, rather than the
World should be deprived of your Lucubrations; I have taken involuntary Purges,
I have been vomited, three times have I been can'd, once was I hunted, twice
was my Head broke by a Grenadier, twice was I tossed in a Blanket; I have had
Boxes on the Ear, Slaps on the Chops; I have been frighted, pumped, kicked,
slandered, and beshitten. -- I hope Gentlemen, you are all convinced that this
Author of Mr. Lintott's could mean nothing else but starving you, by poisoning
me. It remains for us to consult the best and speediest Methods of Revenge.'



He had scarce done speaking, but the Historian proposed a History of his Life.
The Exeter-Exchange-Gentleman was for penning Articles of his Faith. Some
pretty smart Pindarick, (says the Red-Stocking Poet) would effectually do his
Business. But the Index-maker said there was nothing like an Index to his Homer.

After several Debates they came to the following Resolutions. Resolved, That
every Member of this Society, according to his several Abilities, shall
contribute some way or other to the Defamation of Mr. Pope. Resolved, That
toward the Libelling of the said Pope, there be a Sum employed not exceeding
Six Pounds Sixteen shillings and Nine Pence (not including Advertisements.)
Resolved, That he has on purpose, in several Passages, perverted the true
ancient Heathen Sense of Homer, for the more effectual Propagation of the
Popish Religion. Resolved, That the Printing of Homer's Battles at this
Juncture, has been the Occasion of all the Disturbances of this Kingdom.
Ordered, That Mr. Barnivelt be invited to be a Member of this Society, in order
to make further Discoveries. Resolved, That a number of effective Errata's be
raised out of Pope's Homer (not exceeding 1746,) and that every Gentleman who
shall send in one Error, for his Encouragement shall have the whole Works of
this Society gratis. Resolved, That a Sum not exceeding Ten Shillings and Six
pence be distributed among the Members of this Society for Coffee and Tobacco,
in order to enable them the more effectually to defame him in Coffee-Houses.
Resolved, That toward the further lessening the Character of the said Pope,
some Persons be deputed to abuse him at Ladies Tea-Tables, and that in
consideration our Authors are not well dressed enough, Mr. C^y and Mr. Ke^l be
deputed for that Service. Resolved, That a Ballad be made against Mr. Pope, and
that Mr. Oldmixon, Mr. Gildon, and Mrs. Centlivre, do prepare and bring in the
same. Resolved, That above all, some effectual Ways and Means be found to
increase the Joint Stock of the Reputation of this Society, which at present is
exceeding low, and to give their Works the greater Currency; whether by raising
the Denomination of the said Works by counterfeit Title Pages, or mixing a
greater Quantity of the fine Metal of other Authors, with the Alloy of this
Society. Resolved, That no Member of this Society for the future mix Stout in
his Ale in a Morning, and that Mr. B^ remove from the Hercules and Still.
Resolved, That all our Members, (except the Cook's Wife) be provided with a
sufficient Quantity of the vivifying Drops, or Byfield's Sal Volatile.
Resolved, That Sir R^ B^ be appointed to endue this Society with a large
Quantity of regular and exalted Ferments, in order to enliven their cold
Sentiments (being his true Receipt to make Wits.)


These Resolutions being taken, the Assembly was ready to break up, but they
took so near apart in Mr. Curll's Afflictions, that none of them could leave
him without giving him some Advice to reinstate him in his Health.

Mr. Gildon was of opinion, That in order to drive a Pope out of his Belly, he
should get the Mummy of some deceased Moderator of the General Assembly in
Scotland, to be taken inwardly as an effectual Antidote against Antichrist; but
Mr. Oldmixon did conceive that the Liver of the Person who administered the
Poison, boiled in Broth, would be a more certain Cure.

While the Company were expecting the Thanks of Mr. Curll, for these
demonstrations of their Zeal, a whole pile of Sir Richard's Essays on a sudden
fell on his Head; the Shock of which in an Instant brought back his Delirium.
He immediately rose up, over-turn'd the Close-stool, and besh-t the Essays
(which may probably occasion a second Edition) then without putting up his
Breeches, in a most furious Tone he thus broke out to his Books, which his
distempered Imagination represented to him as alive, coming down from their
Shelves flutterring their Leaves, and flapping their Covers at him.

Now G-d damn all Folio's, Quarto's, Octavo's and Duodecimo's! ungrateful
Varlets that you are, who have so long taken up my House without paying for
your Lodging? -- Are you not the beggarly Brood of fumbling Journeymen; born in
Garrets, among Lice and Cobwebs, nursed up on Gray Peace, Bullocks Liver, and
Porters Ale? -- Was not the first Light you saw, the Farthing candle I paid
for? Did you not come before your Time into dirty Sheets of brown Paper? -- And
have not I clothed you in double Royal, lodged you handsomely on decent
Shelves, laced your Backs with Gold, equipt you with splendid Titles, and sent
you into the World with the Names of Persons of Quality? Must I be always
plagued with you? Why flutter ye your Leaves, and flap your Covers at me? Damn
ye all, ye Wolves in Sheeps Clothing; Rags ye were, and to Rags ye shall
return. Why hold you forth your Texts to me, ye paltry Sermons? Why cry ye --
at every Word to me, ye bawdy Poems? -- To my Shop at Tunbridge ye shall go, by
G^ and thence be drawn like the rest of your Predecessors, bit by bit, to the
Passage-House; For in this present Emotion of my Bowels, how do I compassionate
those who have great need, and nothing to wipe their Breech with?

Having said this, and at the same Time recollecting that his own was yet
unwiped, he abated of his Fury, and with great Gravity, applied to that
Function the unfinished Sheets of the Conduct of the Earl of N^m.

A Strange but True RELATION HOW EDMUND CURLL, of Fleetstreet, Stationer, Out
of an extraordinary Desire of Lucre, went into Change-Alley, and was converted
from the Christian Religion by certain Eminent Jews: And how he was circumcised
and initiated into their Mysteries.
AVARICE (as Sir Richard in the Third Page of his Essays has elegantly
observed) is an inordinate Impulse of the Soul toward the amassing or heaping
together a Superfluity of Wealth without the least Regard of applying it to its
proper Uses.

And how the Mind of Man is possessed with this Vice, may be seen every Day
both in the City and Suburbs thereof. It has been always esteemed by Plato,
Puffendorf and Socrates, as the darling Vice of old Age: But now our young Men
are turned Usurers and Stock-jobbers; and, instead of lusting after the real
Wives and Daughters of our rich Citizens, they covet nothing but their Money
and Estates. Strange Change of Vice! when the Concupiscence of Youth is
converted into the Covetousness of Age, and those Appetites are now become
VENAL which should be VENEREAL.

In the first Place, let us show you how many of the ancient Worthies and
Heroes of Antiquity have been undone and ruined by this Deadly Sin of Avarice.

I shall take the Liberty to begin with Brutus, that noble Roman. Does not
Aetian inform us that he received Fifty Broad Pieces for the Assassination of
that renowned Emperor Julius Caesar, who fell a Sacrifice to the Jews, as Sir
Edmund Bury Godfrey did to the Papists?

Did not Themistocles let in the Goths and Vandals into Carthage for a Sum of
Money, where they barbarously put out the other Eye of the famous Hannibal? As
Herodotus has it in his ninth Book upon the Roman Medals.

Even the great Cato (as the late Mr. Addison has very well observed) though
otherwise a Gentleman of good Sense, was not unsullied by this pecuniary
Contagion: For he sold Athens to Artaxerxes Longimanus for a hundred
Rix-Dollars, which in our Money will amount to two Talents and thirty
Sestertii, according to Mr. Demoiver's Calculation. See Hesiod in his 7 th
Chapter of Feasts and Festivals.

Actuated by the same Diabolical Spirit of Gain, Scylla the Roman Consul shot
Alcibiades the Senator with a Pistol, and robbed him of several Bank Bills and
Chequer Notes to an immense Value; for which he came to an untimely End, and
was denied Christian Burial. Hence comes the Proverb incidat in Scyllam.

To come near to our own Times, and give you one modern Instance (though well
known and often quoted by Historians, viz. Echard, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus,
Virgil, Horace, and others) It Is that, I mean, of the famous Godfrey of
Bulloigne, one of the great Heroes of the Holy War, who robbed Cleopatra Queen
of Egypt of a Diamond Necklace, Earrings, and a Tompion's Gold Watch (which
was given her by Mark Antony) all these things were found in Godfrey's Breeches
Pocket, when he was killed at the Seige of Damascus.

Who then can wonder after so many great and illustrious Examples that Mr.
Edmund Curll the Stationer, should renounce the Christian Religion for the
Mammon of Unrighteousness, and barter his precious Faith for the filthy
Prospect of Lucre in the present Fluctuation of Stocks.

It having been observed to Mr. Curll by some of his ingenious Authors, (who I
fear are not over-charg'd with any Religion) what immense Sums the Jews had got
by Bubbles, etc. he immediately turned his Mind from the Business in which he
was educated, but thrived little, and resolved to quit his Shop, for Change
Alley. Whereupon falling into Company with the Jews at their Club at the Sign
of the Cross in Cornhill, they began to tamper with him upon the most important
Points of the Christian Faith, which he for some time zealously, and like a
good Christian obstinately defended. They promised him Paradise, and many other
Advantages hereafter, but he artfully insinuated that he was more inclinable to
listen to present Gain. They took the Hint, and promised him that immediately
upon his Conversion to their Persuasion he should become as rich as a Jew.

They made use likewise of several other Arguments, to wit,

That the wisest Man that ever was, and inasmuch the richest, beyond all
peradventure, was a Jew, videlicet Solomon.

That David the Man after God's own Heart, was a Jew also. And most of the
Children of Israel, are suspected for holding the same Doctrine.

This Mr. Curll at first strenuously denied, for indeed he thought them Roman
Catholics, and so far was he from giving way to their Temptations, that to
convince them of his Christianity he called for a Pork Grisking.

They now promised if he would poison his Wife and give up his Grisking, that
he should marry the rich Ben Meymon's only Daughter. This made some Impression
on him.

They then talked to him in the Hebrew Tongue, which he not understanding, it
was observed had very great Weight with him.

They, now perceiving that his Godliness was only Gain, desisted from all other
Arguments, and attacked him on his weak side, namely that of Avarice.

Upon which John Mendez offered him an Eighth of an advantageous Bargain for
the Apostles Creed, which he readily and wickedly renounced.

He then sold the Nine and thirty Articles for a Bull; but insisted hard upon
Black-Puddings, being a great Lover thereof.

Joshua Parrara engaged to let him share with him in his Bottomrye, upon this
he was persuaded out of his Christian Name; but he still adhered to
Black-Puddings.

Sir Gideon Lopez tempted him with Forty Pound Subscription in Ram's Bubble;
for which he was content to give up the Four Evangelists, and he was now
completed a perfect Jew, all but Black-Pudding and Circumcision; for both of
which he would have been glad to have had a Dispensation.

But on the 17th of March, Mr. Curll (unknown to his Wife) came to the Tavern
asoresaid. At his Entrance into the Room he perceived a meagre Man with a
sallow Countenance, a black forky Beard, and long Vestment. In his Right Hand
he held a large Pair of Sheers, and in his Left a red hot Searing-Iron. At
Sight of this, Mr. Curll's Heart trembled within him, and feign would he
retire; but he was prevented by six Jews, who laid Hands upon him, and
unbuttoning his Breeches threw him upon the Table, a pale pitiful Spectacle.

He now entreated them in the most moving Tone of Voice to dispense with that
unmanly Ceremonial, which if they would consent to, he faithfully promised that
he would eat a Quarter of Paschal Lamb with them the next Sunday following.

All these Protestations availed him nothing, for they threatened him that all
Contracts and Bargains should be void unless he would submit to bear all the
outward and visible Signs of Judaism.

Our Apostate hearing this, stretched himself upon his Back, spread his Legs,
and waited for the Operation; but when he saw the High Priest take up the Cleft
Stick, he roared most unmercifully, and swore several Christian Oaths, for
which the Jews rebuked him.

The Savor of the Effluvia that issued from him, convinced the Old Levite and
all his Assistants that he needed no present Purgation, wherefore without
farther anointing him he proceeded in his Office; when by an unfortunate Jerk
upward of the impatient Victim, he lost five times as much as ever Jew did
before,

They finding that he was too much circumcised, which by the Levitical Law is
worse than not being circumcised at all, refused to stand to any of their
Contracts: Wherefore they cast him forth from their Synagogue; and he now
remains a most piteous, woeful and miserable Sight at the Sign of the Old
Testament and Dial in Fleet Street, his Wife, (poor Woman) is at this Hour
lamenting over him, wringing her hands and tearing her Hair; for the barbarous
Jews still keep, and expose at Jonathan's and Garraway's, the Memorial of her
Loss, and her Husband's Indignity.

PRAYER. (To save the Stamp.)
KEEP us, we beseech thee, from the Hands of such barbarous and cruel Jews, who
albeit they abhor the Blood of Black-Puddings, yet thirst they vehemently after
the Blood of White ones. And that we may avoid such like Calamities, may all
good and well-disposed Christians be warned by this unhappy Wretch's woeful
Example to abominate the heinous Sin of Avarice, which sooner or later will
draw them into the cruel Clutches of Satan, Papists, Jews, and Stock-jobbers.
Amen.

GOD's Revenge AGAINST PUNNING.
Showing the miserable Fates of Persons addicted to this Crying Sin, in Court
and Town.
MAnifold have been the Judgments which Heaven from Time to Time, for the
Chastisement of a Sinful People, has inflicted on whole Nations. For when the
Degeneracy becomes Common, it is but Just the Punishment should be General: Of
this kind, in our own unfortunate Country, was that destructive Pestilence,
whose Mortality was so fatal, as to sweep away, if Sir William Petty may be
believed, Five Millions of Christian Souls, besides Women and Jews.

Such also was that dreadful Conflagration ensuing, in this famous metropolis
of London, which consumed, according to the Computation of Sir Samuel Morland,
100000 Houses, not to mention Churches and Stables.

Scarce had this Unhappy Nation recovered these Funest Disasters, when the
Abomination of Play Houses rose up in this Land: From hence has an Inundation
of Obscenity flowed from the Court and overspread the Kingdom: Even Infants
disfigured the Walls of holy Temples with exorbitant Representations of the
Members of Generation; nay, no sooner had they learnt to Spell, but they had
Wickedness enough to Write the Names thereof in large Capitals: an Enormity,
observed by Travelers to be found in no Country but England.

But when Whoring and Popery were driven hence by the Happy Revolution; still
the Nation so greatly offended, that Socinianism, Arianism and Whistonism
triumphed in our Streets, and were in a manner become Universal.

And yet still, after all these Visitations, it has pleased Heaven to visit us
with a Contagion more Epidemical, and of consequence more Fatal: This was
foretold to us, First, by that unparalled Eclipse in 1714: Secondly, By the
dreadful Coruscation in the Air this present Year: And Thirdly, By the Nine
Comets seen at once over Soho-Square, by Mrs. Katherine Wadlington, and Others;
a Contagion that first crept in amongst the First Quality, descended to their
Footman, and infused it self into their Ladies: I mean the woeful Practice of
PUNNING. This does occasion the Corruption of our Language, and therein of the
Word of God translated into our Language, which certainly every sober Christian
must Tremble at.

Now such is the Enormity of this Abomination, that our very Nobles not only
commit Punning over Tea, and in Taverns, but even on the Lord's- Day, and in
the King's Chapel: Therefore to deter Men from this evil Practice, I shall
give some True and Dreadful Examples of God's Revenge against Punsters.

The Right Honorable (...) (but it is not safe to insert the Name of an
eminent Nobleman in this Paper, yet I will venture to say that such a one has
been seen; which is all we can say, considering the largeness of his Sleeves:)
This young Nobleman was not only a flagitious Punster himself, but was
accessory to the Punning of others, by Consent, by Provocation, by Connivance,
and by Defense of the Evil committed; for which the Lord mercifully spared his
Neck, but as a Mark of Reprobation wryed his Nose.

Another Nobleman of great Hopes, no less guilty of the same Crime, was made
the Punisher of himself with his own Hand, in the Loss of 500 Pounds at Box and
Dice; whereby this unfortunate young Gentleman incurred the heavy Displeasure
of his aged Grandmother.

A Third of no less illustrious Extraction, for the same Vice, was permitted to
fall into the Arms of a Dalilah, who may one day cut off his curious Hair, and
deliver him up to the Philistines.

Colonel F^, an ancient Gentleman of grave Deportment, gave into this Sin so
early in his Youth, that whenever his Tongue endeavors to speak Common Sense,
he Hesitates so as not to be understood.

Thomas Pickle Gentleman, for the same Crime, banished to Minorca.

Muley Hamet, from a healthy and hopeful Officer in the Army, turned a
miserable Invalid at Tilbury-Fort.

(...) Eustace, Esquire for the Murder of much of the King's English in Ireland, is
quite deprived of his Reason, and now remains a lively Instance of Emptiness
and Vivacity.

Poor Daniel Button, for the same Offense, deprived of his Wits.

One Samuel an Irishman, for his forward Attempt to Pun, was stunted in his
Stature, and has been visited all his Life after with Bulls and Blunders.

George Simmons, Shoemaker at Turnstile in Holborn, was so given to this
Custom, and did it with so much Success, that his Neighbors gave out he was a
Wit. Which Report coming among his Creditors, no body would trust him; so that
he is now a Bankrupt, and his Family in a miserable Condition.

Diverse eminent Clergymen of the University of Cambridge, for having propagated
this Vice, became great Drunkards and Tories.

From which Calamities, the Lord in his Mercy defend us all. etc. etc.

THE WONDERFUL WONDER of WONDERS.
THERE is a certain Person lately arrived at this City, whom it is very proper
the World should be informed of. His Character may, perhaps, be thought very
Inconsistent, Improbable, and Unnatural; however I intend to draw it with the
utmost Regard to Truth. This I am the better qualified to do, because he is a
sort of Dependant upon our Family, and almost of the same Age; though I cannot
directly say, I have ever secn him. He is a Native of this Country, and has
lived long among us, but what appears wonderful, and hardly credible, was never
seen before, by any Mortal.

It is true, indeed, he always chooses the lowest Place in Company, and
contrives it so, to keep out of Sight. It is reported, however, that in his
younger Days he was frequently exposed to View, but always against his Will,
and was sure to smart for it.

As to his Family, he came into the World a Younger Brother, being of six
Children, the fourth in order of ( 1) Birth; of which the eldest is now Head of
the House, the second and third carry Arms: but the two Youngest are only
Footmen: Some indeed, add, that he has likewise a Twin-Brother, who lives
over against him, and keeps a ( 2) Victualling-House: He has the Reputation to
be a close, griping, squeezing Fellow; and that when his Bags are full, he is
often Needy; yet, when the Fit takes him, as fast as he gets, he lets it fly.

When in Office, no one discharges himself, or does his Business better. He
has sometimes strained hard for an Honest Livelihood, and never got a Bit,
till every Body else had done.

One Practice appears very blameable in him, that every Morning he privately
frequents unclean Houses, where any modest Person would blush to be seen. And
although this be generally known, yet the World, as Censorious as it is, is so
kind to overlook this Infirmity in him. To deal Impartially, it must be
granted, that he is too great a Lover of himself, and very often consults his
own Ease at the Expense of his best Friends. But this is one of his
blind-Sides; and the best of Men I fear are not without them.

He has been constituted by the higher Powers in the Station of
Receiver-General, in which Employment some have censured him for playing fast
and loose. He is likewise Overseer of the Golden Mines, which he daily inspects
when his Health will permit him.

He was long bred under a ( 3) Master of Arts, who instilled good Principles in
him, but these were soon Corrupted. I know not whether this deserves mention,
that he is so very Capricious, as to take it for an equal Affront to talk
either of kissing or kicking him, which has occasioned a Thousand Quarrels:
However no body was ever so great a Sufferer for Faults which he neither was,
nor possibly could be guilty of.

In his Religion he has thus much of the Quaker, that he stands always covered,
even in the Presence of the King; in most other Points, a perfect ( 4)
Idolater, although he endeavors to conceal it; for he is known to offer daily
Sacrifices to certain Subterraneous Nymphs, whom he worships in an humble
Posture, prone on his Face, and stripped stark Naked, and so leaves his Offerings
behind him, which the ( 5) Priests of those Goddesses are careful enough to
remove upon certain Seasons, with the utmost Privacy at Midnight, and from
thence maintained themselves and Families. In all urgent Necessities and
Pressures he applies himself to these Deities, and sometimes even in the
Streets and Highways, from an Opinion that those Powers have an Influence in
all Places, although their peculiar Residence is in Caverns under Ground. Upon
these Occasions the fairest Ladies will not refuse to lend their Hands to
assist him: For, although they are ashamed to have him seen in their Company, or
even so much as to hear him Named; yet it is well known, that he is one of
their constant Followers.

In Politics, he always submits to what is uppermost, but he peruses Pamphlets
on both Sides with great Impartiality, though seldom till every Body else have
done with them.

His Learning is of a mixed kind, and he may properly be called a Helluo
librorum, or another Jacobus de Voragine: though his Studies are chiefly confined
to Schoolmen, Commentators, and German Divines, together with Modern Poetry
and Critics: And he is an Atomick Philosopher, strongly maintaining a Void in
Nature, which he seems to have fairly proved by many Experiments.

I shall now proceed to describe some peculiar Qualities, which in several
Instances seem to distinguish this Person from the common Race of other Mortals.

His Grandfather was a Member of the Rump Parliament, as the Grandson is of the
Present, where he often rises, sometimes grumbles but never speaks. However, he
lets nothing pass willingly, but what is well digested. His Courage is
indisputable, for he will take the boldest Man alive by the Nose.

He is generally the first a Bed in the Family, and the last up, which is to be
lamented, because when he happens to rise before the rest, it has been thought
to forebode some good Fortune to his Superiors.

As Wisdom is acquired by Age, so by every new ( 6) Wrinkle in his Face, he is
reported to gain some new Knowledge.

In him we may observe the true Effects and Consequences of Tyranny in a State:
For, as he is a great Oppressor of all below him, so there is no Body more
oppressed by those above him: Yet in this Time, he has been so highly in
Favor, that many Illustrious Persons have been entirely indebted to him for
their Preferments.

He has discovered from his own Experience the true Point wherein all human
Actions, Projects, and Designs do chiefly terminate; and how mean and sordid
they are at the Bottom.

It behooves the Public to keep him quiet, for his frequent Murmurs are a
certain Sign of intestine Tumults.

No Philosopher ever lamented more the Luxury, for which these Nations are so
justly taxed; it has been known to cost him ( 7) Tears of Blood: For in his
own Nature he is far from being Profuse, though indeed, he never stays a Night at
a Gentleman's House without leaving something behind him.

He receives with g eat Submission whatever his Patrons think fit to give him;
and when they lay heavy Burdens upon him, which is frequently enough, he gets
rid of them as soon as he can; but not without some Labor and much Grumbling.

He is a perpetual Hanger-on; yet no Body knows how to be without him. He
patiently fuffers himself to be kept under, but loves to be well used, and in
that Case will sacrifice his Vitals to give you Ease; and he has hardly one
Aquaintance for whom he has not been Bound; yet, as far as we can find, was
never known to lose any thing by it.

He is observed to be very ( 8) unquiet in the Company of a Frenchman in New
Clothes, or a young Coquett.

He is, in short the Subject of much Mirth and Raillery, which he seems to take
well enough, though it has not been observed that ever any good Thing came from
himself.

There is so general an Opinion of his Justice, that sometimes very hard Cases
are left to his Decision: And while he sits upon them, he carries himself
exactly even between both sides, except where some knotty Point arises, and
then he is observed to lean a little to the Right or Left as the Matter
inclines him, but his Reasons for it are so manifest and convincing, that every
Man approves them.

POSTSCRIPT.
Gentle Reader,
THOUGH I am not insensible how many Thousand Persons have been, and still are,
with great Dexterity handling this Subject, and no less aware of what infinite
Rheams of Paper have been laid out upon it; however in my Opinion, no Man
living has touched it with greater Nicety, and more delicate Turns, than our
Author. But because there is some intended Obscurity in this Relation, and
Curiosity, inquisitive of Secrets, may possibly not enter into the Bottom and
Depth of the Subject, 'twas thought not improper to take off the Veil, and gain
the Reader's Favor by enlarging his Insight. ARS enim non habet Inimicum nisi
ignorantem. It Is well known, that it has been the Policy of all Times, to
deliver down Important Subjects by Emblem and Riddle, and not to suffer the
Knowledge of Truth to be derived to us in plain and simple Terms, which are
generally as soon forgot as conceived. For this Reason, the Heathen Religion is
mostly couched under Mythology. For the like Reason (this being a FUNDAMENTAL
in its kind) the Author has thought fit to wrap up his Treasure in clean
Linen, which it is our Business to lay open, and set in a due Light; for I
have observed, upon any accidental Discovery, the least Glimpse has given great
Diversion to the eager Spectator, as many Ladies could testify, were it proper,
or the Case would admit.

The politest Companies have vouchsafed to smile at the bare Name, and some
People of Fashon have been so little scrupulous of bringing it in Play, that,
it was the usual saying of a Knight and a Man of good Breeding, That whenever
he rose, his A-se rose with him.

(1) He alludes to the Manner of our Birth, the Head and Arms appearing before
the Posteriors and the two Feet, which he calls the Footmen.

(2) Victualling-House.] The Belly, which receives and digests our Nourishment.

(3) Master of Arts.) Persius, Magister Artis, Ingenique Largitor Venture.

(4) Idolater] Alludes to the Sacrifices offered by the Romans to the Goddess
Cloacina.

(5) Priests.] Gold-finders, who perform their Office in the Nightime: but
our Author further seems to have an Eye to the Custom of the Heathen Priests
stealing the Offerings in the Night; of which see more in the Story of Bell and
the Dragon.

(6) Wrinkle.] This refers to a Proverb -- You have one Wrinkle in your A-se
more than you had before.

(7) Tears of Blood.] Haemorrhoids, according to the Physicians, are a frequeut
Consequence of Intemperance.

(8) Unquiet.] Their Tails being generally observed to be most restless.

THE WONDER Of all the Wonders, that ever the World wondered at.
For all Persons of Quality and Others.
NEWLY arrived at this City the famous Artist John Emanuel Schoitz, who to the
great Surprise and Satisfaction of all Spectators, is ready to do the following
Wonderful Performances, the like before never seen in this Kingdom.

He will heat a Bar of Iron red hot, and thrust it into a barrel of Gunpowder
before all the Company, and yet it shall not take fire.

He lets any Gentleman charge a Blunderbuss, with the same Gunpowder, and
twelve Leaden Bullets, which Blunderbuss the said Artist discharges full in the
Face of the said Company, without the least hurt, the Bullets sticking in the
Wall behind them.

He takes any Gentleman's own Sword, and runs it through the said Gentleman's
Body, so that the Point appears bloody at the back, to all the Spectators; then
he takes out the Sword, wipes it clean, and returns it to the owner, who
receives no manner of hurt.

He takes a Pot of Scalding Oil, and throws it by great Ladles full directly at
the Ladies, without spoiling their Clothes or burning their Skins.

He takes any Person of Quality's Child from two Years Old to six, and lets the
Child's own Father or Mother take a Pike in their Hands; then the Artist takes
the Child in his Arms and tosses it upon the Point of the Pike, where it sticks
to the great Satisfaction of all Spectators; and is then taken off without so
much as a hole in his Coat.

He mounts upon a Scaffold just over the Spectators, and from thence throws
down a great Quantity of large Tiles and Stones, which fall like so many
Pillows, without so much as discomposing either Perukes or Head-dresses.

He takes any Person of Quality up to the said Scaffold, which Person pulls off
his Shoes, and leaps nine Foot directly down on a Board prepared on Purpose
full of sharp Spikes six Inches long, without hurting his Feet or Damaging his
Stockings.

He places the said Board on a Chair, upon which a Lady sits down with another
Lady in her Lap, while the Spikes instead of entering into the under Lady's
flesh, will feel like a Velvet Cushion.

He takes any Person of Quality's Footman, ties a Rope about his bare Neck, and
draws him up by Pullies to the Cieling, and these keeps him hanging as long as
his Master or the Company pleases, the said Footman to the Wonder and Delight
of all Beholders, with a Pot of Ale in one Hand and a Pipe in the other; and
when he is let down, there will not appear the least Mark of the Cord about his
Neck.

He bids a Lady's Maid put her finger into a Cup of clear Liquor like Water,
upon which her Face and both her Hands are immediately withered, like an Old
Woman of fourscore, her Belly swells as if she were in a Week of her Time, and
her Legs are as thick as Mill-Posts; but upon putting her finger into another
Cup, she becomes as Young and Handsome as she was before.

He gives any Gentleman leave to drive forty Twelve-penny Nails up to the Head
in a Porter's backside, and then places the said Porter on a Loadstone Chair,
which draws out every Nail, and the Porter feels no Pain.

He likewise draws the Teeth of half a Dozen Gentlemen, mixes and jumbles them
in a Hat, gives any Person leave to blindfold him, and raturns each their own,
and fixes them as well as ever.

With his Forefinger and Thumb he thrusts several Gentlemen's and Lady's Eyes
out of their Heads, without the least Pain, at which time they see an
unspeakable Number of beautiful Colors, and after they are entertained to the
full, he places them again in their proper Sockets, without any Damage to the
sight.

He lets any Gentleman drink a Quart of hot melted Lead, and by a Draught of
prepared Liquor, of which he takes part himself, he makes the said Lead pass
through the said Gentleman before all the Spectators, without any Damage: After
which it is produced in a Cake to the Company.

With many other Wonderful Performances of Art, too tedious here to mention.

The said Artist has performed before most Kings and Princes in Europe with
great Applause.

He Performs every Day (except Sundays) from Ten of the Clock to One in the
Forenoon; and from Four till Seven in the Evening, at the New Inn in Smithfield.

The first Seat a British Crown, the second a British Half-Crown, and the
lowest a British Shilling.

N. B. The best Hands in Town are to play at the said Show.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE The MAYOR and ALDERMEN of the City of LONDON: The
Humble Petition Of the Colliers, Cooks, Cook-Maids, Blacksmiths, Jackmakers,
Brasiers, and Others.
SHOWS,
THAT whereas certain Virtuosi Disaffected to the Government, and to the Trade
and Prosperity of this Kingdom, taking upon them the Name and Title of the
CATOPTRICAL VICTUALLERS, have presumed, by Gathering, Breaking, Folding, and
Bundling-up the Sunbeams, by the help of certain Glasses, to Make, Produce,
and Kindle up several New Focus's or Fires within these His Majesty's
Dominions, and thereby to Boil, Bake, Stew, Fry and Dress all sorts of Victuals
and Provisions, to Brew, Distill Spirits, Smelt Oar, and in general, to perform
all the Offices of Culinary Fires; and are endeavoring to procure to
themselves the Monopoly of this their said Invention. We beg leave humbly to
represent to your Honors.

That such Grant or Patent will utterly Ruin and reduce to Beggary your
Petitioners, their Wives, Children, Servants, and Trades on them depending;
there being nothing left to them, after the said Invention, but Warming of
Cellars and Dressing of Suppers in the Wintertime. That the abolishing so
considerable a Branch of the Coasting Trade as that of the Colliers, will
destroy the Navigation of this Kingdom. That whereas the said Catoptrical
Victuallers talk of making use of the Moon by Night, as of the Sun by Day, they
will utterly ruin the numerous Body of Tallow-Chandlers, and impair a very
considerable branch of the Revenue which arises from the Tax upon Tallow and
Candles.

That the said Catoptrical Victuallers do profane the Emanations of that
Glorious Luminary the Sun, which is appointed to Rule the Day, and not to Roast
Mutton. And we humbly conceive, it will be found contrary to the known Laws of
this Kingdom, to Confine, Forestall, and Monopolize the Beams of the Sun. And
whereas the said Catoptrical Victuallers have undertaken by Burning-Glasses
made of Ice, to Roast an Ox upon the Thames next Winter: We conceive all such
Practices to be an Encroachment upon the Rights and Privileges of the Company
of Watermen.

That the Diversity of Exposition of the several Kitchens in this great City,
whereby some receive the Rays of the Sun sooner, and others later, will
occasion great Irregularity as to the Time of Dining of the several
Inhabitants, and consequently great Uncertainty and Confusion in the dispatch
of Business: And to those who, by reason of their Northern Exposition, will be
still forced to be at the Expenses of Culinary Fires, it will reduce the Price
of their Manufacture to such Inequality as is inconsistent with common Justice:
And the same Inconveniency will affect Landlords in the Value of their Rents.

That the Use of the said Glasses will oblige Cooks and Cook-maids to study
Optics and Astronomy, in order to know the due Distances of the said Focus's
or Fires, and to adjust the Position of their Glasses to the several Altitudes
of the Sun, varying according to the Hours of the Day, and the Seasons of the
Year; which Studies, at these years, will be highly Troublesome to the said
Cooks and Cook-Maids, not to say any thing of the utter Incapacity of some of
them to go through with such difficult Arts; or (which is still a greater
Inconvenience) it will throw the whole Art of Cookery into the Hands of
Astronomers and Glass-Grinders, Persons utterly unskilled in other parts of
that Profession, to the great Detriment of the Health of His Majesty's good
Subjects.

That it is known by Experience, That Meat Roasted with Sunbeams is extremely
unwholesome; witness several that have died suddenly after eating the
Provisions of the said Catoptrical Victuallers; forasmuch as the Sunbeams
taken inwardly, render the Humors too Hot and Adust, occasion great Sweatings,
and dry up the Rectual Moisture.

That Sunbeams taken inwardly, shed a Malignant Influence upon the Brain, by
their natural Tendency toward the Moon; and produce Madness and Distraction at
the time of the Full Moon. That the constant use of so great Quantities of this
Inward Light, will occasion the Growth of Quakerism, to the Danger of the
Church; and Poetry, to the Danger of the State.

That the Influences of the Constellations, through which the Sun passes, will
with his Beams, be conveyed into the Blood; and when the Sun is amongst the
Horned Signs, may produce such a Spirit of Unchastity, as is dangerous to the
Honor of your Worships Families.

That Mankind living much upon the Seeds and other Parts of Plants, these being
impregnated with the Sunbeams, may vegetate and grow in the Bowels, a Thing of
more dangerous Consequence to human Bodies than Breeding of Worms; and this
will fall heaviest upon the Poor, who live upon Roots; and the Weak and Sickly,
who live upon Barley and Rice-Gruel, etc. for which we are ready to produce to
your Honors the Opinions of Eminent Physicians, That the Taste and Property of
the Victuals is much altered to the worse by the said Solar Cookery, the
Fricasses being deprived of the Haut Gout they acquire by being dressed over
Charcoal.

Lastly, Should it happen by an Eclipse of an extraordinary Length, that this
City should be deprived of the Sunbeams for several Months; how will His
Majesty's Subjects subsist in the Interim, when common Cookery, with the Arts
depending upon it, is totally lost?

In Consideration of these, and many other Inconveniences, your Petitioners
humbly pray, That your Honors would either totally prohibit the Confining and
Manufacturing the Sunbeams for any of the useful Purposes of Life, or in the
ensuing Parliament procure a Tax to be laid upon them, which may answer both
the Duty and Price of Coals, and which we humbly conceive cannot be less than
Thirty Shillings per Yard Square, reserving the sole Right and Privilege of the
Catoptrical Cookery to the Royal Society, and to the Commanders and Crew of the
Bomb-Vessels, under the Direction of Mr. Whiston, for finding out the
Longitude, who by Reason of the Remoteness of their Nations, may be reduced to
Streights for want of Firing.

And we likewise beg that your Honors, as to the forementioned Points, would
hear the Reverend Mr. Flamstead, who is the Legal Officer appointed by the
Government to look after the Heavenly Luminaries, whom we have constituted our
Trusty and Learned Solicitor.

REASONS Humbly Offered By the Company exercising the Trade and Mystery of
UPHOLDERS, against Part of the BILL, For the better Viewing, Searching and
Examining Drugs, Medicines, etc. 1724.
BEING called upon by several Retailers and Dispensers of Drugs and Medicines
about Town, to use our Endeavors against the Bill now depending, for Viewing,
etc. In regard of our common Interest, and in Gratitude to the said Retailers
and Dispensers of Medicines (which we have always found to be very effectual)
we presume to lay the following Reasons before the Public, against the said
Bill.

That the Company of Upholders are far from being averse to the giving of Drugs
and Medicines in general, provided they may be of such Qualities as we require,
and administered by such Persons in whom our Company justly repose the greatest
Confidence: And provided they tend to the Encouragement of Trade, and the
Consumption of the Woollen Manufacture of this Kingdom.

We beg Leave to observe, that there has been no Complaint from any of the
Nobility, Gentry and Citizens whom we have attended. Our Practice, which
consists chiefly in outward Applications, having been always so effectual, that
none of our Patients have been obliged to undergo a second Operation. Excepting
one Gentlewoman; who, after her first Burial, having burdened her Husband with
a new Brood of posthumous Children, her second Funeral was by us performed
without any farther Charges to the said Husband of the deceased. And we humbly
hope, that one single Instance of this Kind (a Misfortune owing merely to the
Avarice of a Sexton in cutting off a Ring) will not be imputed to any Want of
Skill, or Care, in our Company.

We humbly conceive, that the Power by this Bill lodged in the Censors of the
College of Physicians, to restrain any of His Majesty's Subjects from
dispensing, and well-disposed Persons from taking what Medicines they please,
is a manifest Encroachment on the Liberty and Property of the Subjects.

As the Company exercising the Trade and Mystery of Upholders, have an
undisputed Right in and upon the Bodies of all and every the Subjects of the
Kingdom; we conceive the passing of this Bill, though not absolutely depriving
them of their said Right, might keep them out of Possession by unreasonable
Delays, to the great Detriment of our Company and their numerous Families.

We hope it will be considered that there are Multitudes of necessitous Heirs
and penurious Parents, Persons in pinching Circumstances, with numerous
Families of Children, Wives that have lived long, many robust aged Women with
great Jointures, elder Brothers with bad Understandings, single Heirs of great
Estates, whereby the Collateral Line are for ever excluded, Reversionary
Patents, and Reversionary Promises of Preferments, Leases upon Single Lives,
and Play-debts upon joint Lives, and that the Persons so aggrieved have no Hope
of being speedily relieved any other Way, than by the dispensing of Drugs and
Medicines in the Manner they now are; Burying alive being judged repugnant to
the known Laws of this Kingdom.

That there are many of the Deceased, who by certain mechanical Motions and
Powers are carried about Town, who would have been put into our Hands long
before this Time by any other well-ordered Government; By want of a due Police
in this Particular, our Company have been great Sufferers.

That frequent Funerals contribute to preserve the Genealogies of Families and
the Honors conferred by the Crown, (which are no where so well illustrated as
on this solemn Occasion;) to maintain necessitous Clergy, to enable the Clerks
to appear in decent Habits to officiate on Sundays, to feed the great Retinue
of sober and melancholy Men who appear at the said Funerals, and who must
starve without constant and regular Employment. Moreover we desire it may be
remembered that by the passing of this Bill the Nobility and Gentry will have
their old Coaches lie upon their Hands, which are now employed by our Company.

And we further hope that frequent Funerals will not be discouraged (as is by
this Bill proposed) it being the only Method left of carrying some People to
Church.

We are afraid that by the Hardships of this Bill our Company will be reduced
to leave their Business here, and practice at York and Bristol, where the free
Use of bad Medicines will be still allowed.

It is therefore hoped that no specious Pretense whatsoever will be thought
sufficient to introduce an Arbitrary and Unlimited Power for Peope to live (in
Defiance of Art) as long as they can by the Course of Nature, to the Prejudice
of our Company, and the Decay of Trade.

That as our Company are like to suffer in some measure by the Power given to
Physicians to dissect the Bodies of Malefactors, we humbly hope that the
Manufacture of Cases for Skeletons will be reserved solely to the Coffinmakers.

We likewise humbly presume that the Interests of the several Trades and
Prosessions which depend upon ours, may be regarded; such as that of Hearses,
Coaches, Coffins, Epitaphs, and Bell-ropes, Stone-cutters, Feather-men and
Bellringers; and especially the Manusacturers of Crapes; and the Makers of
Snuff, who use great Quantities of old Coffins, and who, considered in the
Consumption of their Drugs, employ by far the greatest Number of Hands of any
Manufacture of the Kingdom.

Annus Mirabilis: OR, The Wonderful Effects of the approaching Conjunction of
the Planets Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn.
By MART. SCRIBLERUS, Philomath. A Well-Wisher to the Mathematics.
In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas
Corpora --

I SUPPOSE every Body is sufficiently appriz'd of, and duly prepared for the
famous Conjunction to be celebrated the 29th of this Instant December, 1722,
foretold by all the Sages of Antiquity, under the Name of the Annus Mirabilis,
or the Metamorphostical Conjunction; a Word which denotes the mutual
Transformation of Sexes, (the Effect of that Configuration of the Celestial
Bodies) the human Males being to be turned into Females, and the human Females
into Males.

The Egyptians have represented this great Transformation by several
significant Hieroglyphics, particularly one very remarkable. There are carved
upon an Obelisk, a Barber and a Midwife; the Barber delivers his Razor to the
Midwife, and she her Swaddling Clothes to the Barber. Accordingly Thales
Milesius (who, like the rest of his Countrymen, borrowed his Learning from the
Egyptians) after having computed the Time of this famous Conjunction, Then,
says he, shall Men and Women mutually exchange the Pangs of Shaving and
Childbearing.

Anaximander modestly describes this Metamorphosis in mathematical Terms: Then,
says he, shall the negative Quantity of the Women be turned into positive,
their (...) into; (i. e.) their Minus into Plus.

Plato not only speaks of this great Change, but describes all the Preparations
toward it. "Long before the bodily Transformation (says he) Nature shall begin
the most difficult Part of her Work, by changing the Ideas and Inclinations of
the two Sexes: Men shall turn effeminate, and Women manly; Wives shall
domineer, and Husbands obey; Ladies shall ride a Horseback, dressed like
Cavaliers; Princes and Nobles appear in Night-rails and Petticoats; Men shall
squeak upon Theaters with Female Voices, and Women corrupt Virgins; Men shall
knot and cut Paper; and even the Northern People, (...): A Phrase (which for
Modesty's Sake I forbear to translate) which denotes a Vice too frequent
amongst us." So far Plato.

That the Ministry foresaw this great Change, is plain from the Callico-Act;
whereby it is now become the Occupation of the Women all over England, to
convert their useless Female Habits into Beds, Window-Curtains, Chairs, and
Joint-stools; undressing themselves (as it were) before their Transformation.

The Philosophy of this Transformation will not seem surprising to People, who
search into the Bottom of Things. Madam Bourignon, a devout French Lady, has
shown us, how Man was at first created Male and Female in one Individual,
having the Faculty of Propagation within himself: A Circumstance necessary to
the State of Innocence, wherein a Man's Happiness was not to depend upon the
Caprice of another. It was not till after he had made a saux pas, that he had
his Female Mate. Many such Transformations of Individuals have been well
attested; particularly one by Montaigne, and another by the late Bishop of
Salisbury. From all which it appears, that this System of Male and Female has
already undergone, and may hereafter suffer several Alterations. Every
Smatterer in Anatomy knows, that a Woman is but an introverted Man; a new
Fusion and Flatus will turn the hollow Bottom of a Bottle into a Convexity; but
I forbear, (for the Sake of my Modest Men Readers, who are in a few Days to be
Virgins.)

In some Subjects, the smallest Alterations will do: some Men are sufficiently
spread about the Hips, and contrived with that Female Softness, that they want
only the Negative Quantity to make them Buxom Wenches; and there are Women who
are, as it were, already the Ebauche of a good sturdy Man. If Nature could be
puzzled, it will be how to bestow the redundant Matter of the exuberant Bubbies
that now appear about Town, or how to roll out the short dapper Fellows into
well-siz'd Women.

This great Conjunction will begin to operate on Saturday the 29th Instant.
Accordingly, about Eight at Night, as Senezino shall begin at the Opera, Si
videte, Did you but see? He shall be observed to make an unusual Motion; upon
which the Audience will be affected with a red Suffusion over their
Countenance: And because a strong Succession of the Muscles of the Belly is
necessary toward performing this great Operation, both Sexes will be thrown
into a profuse involuntary Laughter; Then (to use the modest Terms of
Anaximander) shall negative Quantity be turned into positive, etc. Time never
beheld, nor will it ever assemble, such a Number of untouched Virgins within
those Walls! but alas! such will be the Impatience and Curiosity of People to
act in their new Capacity, that many of them will go to pot that very Night. To
prevent the Disorders that may happen upon this Occasion, is the chief Design
of this Paper.

Gentlemen have begun already to make use of this Conjunction to Compass their
filthy Purposes. They tell the Ladies forsooth, that it is only parting with a
perishable Commodity; hardly of so much Value as a Callico Under-petticoat,
since, like its Mistress, it will be useless in the Form it is now in. If the
Ladies have no Regard to the Dishonor and Immorality of the Action, I desire
they will consider that Nature, who never destroys her own Productions, will
exempt big-belly'd Women till the time of their Lying-in; so that not to be
transformed, will be the same as to be pregnant. If they don't think it worth
while to defend a Fortress that is to be demolished in a few Days, let them
reflect that it will be a melancholy thing Nine Months hence, to be brought to
Bed of a Bastard; a posthumous Bastard as it were, to which the Quondam Father
can be no more than a dry Nurse.

This wonderful Transformation is the Instrument of Nature, to balance Matters
between the Sexes. The Cruelty of scornful Mistresses shall be returned; The
slighted Maid shall grow into an imperious Gallant, and reward her Undoer with
a big Belly, and a Bastard, etc.

It is hardly possible to imagine the Revolutions that this wonderful
Phenomenon will occasion over the Face of the Earth. I long impatiently to see
the Proceedings of the Parliament of Paris, as to the Title of Succession to
their Crown; this being a Case not provided for by the Salique Law. There will
be no preventing Disorders amongst Friars and Monks; for certainly Vows of
Chastity don't bind but under the Sex in which they were made. The same will
hold good with Marriages, though I think it will be a Scandal amongst Protestants
for Husbands and Wives to part, since there remains still a possibility to
perform the Debitum Conjugale by the Husbands being femme Couverte. I submit it
to the Judgment of the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, whether this Transformation
does not discharge all Suits of Rapes?

The Pope must undergo a new groping; but the false Prophet Mahomet has
contrived Matters well for his Successors; for as the Grand Signior has now a
great many fine Women, he will then have as many fine young Gentlemen at his
Devotion.

These are surprising Scenes, but I beg leave to affirm, that the solemn
Operations of Nature are Subjects of Contemplation, not of Ridicule; therefore
I make it my earnest Request to the merry Fellows, and giggling Girls about
Town, that they would not put themselves in a high Twitter, when they go to
visit a General Lying in of his first Child; his Officers serving as Midwifes,
Nurses and Rockers dispensing Caudle; or if they behold the Reverend Prelates
dressing the Heads and airing the Linen at Court, I beg they will remember
that these Offices must be filled with People of the greatest Regularity, and
best Characters. For the same Reason, I am sorry that a certain Prelate, who
notwithstanding his Confinement, still preserves his healthy, cheerful
Countenance, cannot come in time to be a Nurse at Court,

I likewise earnestly entreat the Maids of Honor, (then Ensigns and Captains
of the Guards) that, at their first setting out, they have some Regard to their
former Station; and do not run wild through all the infamous Houses about Town.
That the present Grooms of the Bedchamber (then Maids of Honor) would not eat
Chalk and Lime in their Green Sickness; and in general, that the Men would
remember that they are become Retremingent, and not by Inadvertency lift up
against Walls and Post.

Petticoats will not be burdensome to the Clergy; but Balls and Assemblies will
be indecent for some Time.

As for you, Coquettes, Bawds, and Chambermaids, (the future Ministers,
Plenipotentaries and Cabinet-Counsellors to the Princes of the Earth) manage
the great Intrigues that will be committed to your Charge, with your usual
Secrecy and Conduct; and the Affairs of your Master will go better than ever.

O ye Exchange Women! (our Right Worshipful Representatives that are to be) be
not so griping in the Sale of your Ware as your Predecessors, but consider that
the Nation, like a spend-thrift Heir, has run out: Be likewise a little more
continent in your Tongues than you are at present, else the Length of Debates
will spoil your Dinners.

You Housewifely good Women, who now preside over the Confectionary,
(henceforth Commissioners of the Treasury) be so (...) as to dispense the
Sugar-Plumbs of the Government with a more impartial and frugal Hand.

Ye Prudes and censorious old Maids, (the Hopes of the Bench) exert but your
usual Talent of finding Faults, and the Laws will be strictly executed; only I
would not have you proceed upon such slender Evidences as you have done
hitherto.

It is from you, eloquent Oyster-Merchants of Billingsgate, (just ready to be
called to the Bar, and quoif'd like your Sister-Serjeants,) that we expect the
shortening the Time, and lessening the Expenses of Lawsuits: For I think you
are obliged to bring your Debates to a short Issue; and even custom will
restrain you from taking the Oyster and leaving only the Shell to your Clients.

O ye Physicians, who in the Figure of old Women are to clean the Tripe in the
Markets; scour it as effectually as you have done that of your Patients, and
the Town will fare most deliciously on Saturdays.

I cannot but congratulate human Nature, upon this happy Transformation; the
only Expedient left to restore the Liberties and Tranquillity of Mankind; which
is so evident, that it is almost an Affront to common Sense to insist upon the
Proof of it. If there can be any such stupid Creature who doubts it, I desire
he will make but the following obvious Reflection: There are in Europe alone,
at present, about a Million of sturdy Fellows, under the Denomination of
standing Forces, with Arms in their Hands: That those are Masters of the Lives,
Liberties and Fortunes of all the rest, I believe no body will deny. It is no
less true in Fact, that Reams of Paper, and above a square Mile of Skins of
Vellum have been employed to no Purpose, to settle Peace amongst those Sons of
Violence. Pray, who is he that will say unto them, Go and disband your selves?
But lo! by this Transformation it is done at once, and the Halcyon Days of
public Tranquillity return. For neither the Military Temper nor Dicipline can
taint the soft Sex for a whole Age to come. Bellaque matribus invisa' Wars
odious now to Mothers, will not grow immediately palatable in their Paternal
State.

Nor will the Influence of this Transformation be less in Family-Tranquility,
than it is in National. Great Faults will be amended, and Frailties forgiven,
on both Sides. A Wife who has been disturbed with late Hours, and choked with
the Haugout of a Sot, will remember her Sufferings, and avoid the Temptation;
and will, for the same Reason, indulge her Mate in his Female Capacity in some
Passions, which she is sensible from Experience are natural to the Sex. Such as
Vanity of fine Cloths, being admired, etc. And now tenderly must she use her
Mate under the Breeding Qualms and Labour-Pains, which she has felt her self?
In short, all unreasonable Demands upon Husbands must cease, because they are
already satisfied from natural Experience that they are impossible. That the
Ladies may govern the Affairs of the World, and the Gentlemen those of their
Household, better than either of them have hitherto done, is the hearty desire
of,

Their Most Sincere Well-Wisher, M. S.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
PLanetary Powders, as necessary for the new Births of Sexes, as Sperma Ceti
for Puerperous Women: Prepared and Sold by John Moore, Apothecary at the Pestle
and Mortar in Abchurch Lane. All Male and Female Implements exchanged at
reasonable Rates; at Mr. Deard's Toy-Shop against St. Dunstan's Church. All
Sorts of Manly Exercise; Riding, Vaulting, etc. taught to the Ladies, at a
Guinea a Lesson; at Mrs. L^ge's in Red-lion-Street.
AN ESSAY Of the Learned MARTINUS SCRIBLERUS, Concerning the ORIGIN of
SCIENCES.
Written to the most Learned Dr. (...) F. R. S. from the Deserts of NUBIA.D
AMONG all the Enquiries which have been pursued by the Curious and
Inquisitive, there is none more worthy the search of a Learned Head, than the
Source from whence we derive those Arts and Sciences which raise us so far
above the Vulgar, the Countries in which they rose, and the Channels by which
they have been conveyed. As they who first brought them amongst us traveled
into the remotest Parts of the Earth to attain them, I may boast of some
advantages by the same means; since I write this from the Deserts of Ethiopia,
from those Plains of Sand which have buried the Pride of Invading Armies, with
my Foot perhaps at this instant ten Fathom over the Grave of Cambyses, a
Solitude to which neither Pythagoras nor Apollonius ever penetrated.

It is universally agreed, that Arts and Sciences took their Rise among the
Egyptians and Indians; but from whom they first received them, is yet a
Secret. The highest Period of Time to which the Learned attempt to trace them,
is from the beginning of the Assyrian Monarchy, when their Inventors were
worshipped as Gods. It is therefore necessary to go backward into Times even
more remote, and to gain some knowledge of their History, from whatever dark
and broken Hints may any way be found in ancient Authors concerning them.

Nor Troy nor Thebes were the first of Empires; we have mention, though not
Histories, of an earlier warlike People called the Pygmaeans. I cannot but
persuade my self, from those Accounts of Il. 3. Hom.
Homer, Aristotle and others, that their History, Wars, and Revolutions were
then a part of the Study of the Learned, from the very Air in which those
Authors speak of them, as of things universally known. And though all we directly
hear is of their Military Achievements, in the brave defense of their Country
from the annual Invasions of a Powerful Enemy, yet I cannot doubt but that they
excelled as much in the Arts of peaceful Government, though there remain no
Traces of their Civil Institutions. Empires as great have been swallowed up in
the wreck of Time, and such certain Periods have been put to them, as occasion
a Total Ignorance of their Story. And if I should conjecture that the like
happened to this Nation, from a general extirpation of the People by those
Flocks of Monstrous Birds, wherewith Antiquity agrees they were continually
infested; it ought not to seem more incredible, than that one of the Baleares
was wasted by Rabbits, Eustathius in Hom. II. 1.
Smynthe by Mice, and of late Speed, in Bermudas.
Bermudas almost depopulated by Rats. Nothing is more natural to imagine, than
that the few survivers of that Empire retired into the depths of their Deserts,
where they lived undisturbed, 'till they were found out by Osyris in his
Travels to instruct Mankind.

He met, says L. 1. chapter 18. Diod.
Diodorus, in Aethiopia, a sort of little Satyrs, who were hairy one half of
their Body, and whose leader Pan accompanied him in his Expedition for the
civilizing of Mankind. Now of this great Personage Pan, we have a very
particular Description in the ancient Writers, who unanimously agree to
represent him, shaggy Bearded, Hairy all over, half a Man, and half a Beast,
and walking erect, with a Staff, (the Posture in which his race are to this Day
shown among us). And since the chief thing to which he applied himself was the
civilizing of Mankind, it should seem that the first Principles of Science must
be received from this People, to whom the Gods were by Il. 1 st.
Homer said to resort twelve Days every Year, for the Conversation of its Wise
and Just Inhabitants.

If from Egypt we proceed to take a View of India, we shall find that their
knowledge also derived itself from the same Source. To that Country did these
Noble Creatures accompany Bacchus in his Expedition, under the Conduct of
Silenus, who is also described to us with the very same Marks and
Qualifications. Mankind is ignorant, says L. 3. chapter 69. Diod.
Diodorus, whence Silenus derived his Birth, through his great Antiquity; but
he had a Tail on his Loins, as likewise had all his Progeny, in sign of their
descent. Here then they settled a Colony, which to this Day subsists with the
same Tails. From this time they seem to have communicated themselves only to
those Men who retired from the Converse of their own Species, to a more
uninterrupted Life of Contemplation. I am much inclined to believe that in the
midst of those Solitudes they instituted the so much celebrated Order of
Gymnosophists. For whoever observes the scene and manner of their Life, will
easily find them to have imitated with all exactness imaginable, the Manners
and Customs of their Masters and Instructors. They are said to dwell in the
thickest Woods, to go naked, to suffer their Bodies to be overrun with Hair,
and their Nails to grow to a prodigious length. Plutarch in his first Orat. on
Alexander's Fortune.
Plutarch says, they eat what they could get in the Fields, their Drink was
Water, and their Bed made of Leaves or Moss. And Herod. L. 1.
Herodotus tells us, that they esteemed it a great exploit to kill very many
Ants, or creeping Things.

Hence we see that the two Nations which contend for the Origin of Learning,
are the same that have ever most abounded with this ingenious Race. Though they
have contested which was first blessed with the rise of Science, yet have they
conspired in being grateful to their common Masters. Egypt is well known to
have worshipped them of old in their own Images: and India may be credibly
supposed to have done the same, from that adoration which they paid in latter
times to the Tooth of one of these hairy Philosophers, as it should seem in
just Gratitude to the Mouth from which they received their Knowledge.

Pass we now over into Greece, where we find Orpheus returning out of Egypt,
with the same intent as Osyris and Bacchus made their Expeditions. From this
period it was, that Greece first heard the Name of Satyrs, or owned them for
Semi-dei. And hence it is surely reasonable to conclude, that he brought some
of this wonderful Species along with him, who also had a leader of the line of
Pan, of the same Name, and expressly called King by (...), Theo. Id. 1 st.
Theocritus. If thus much be allowed, we easily account for two of the
strangest reports in all Antiquity. One, that the Tradition of Beasts following
the Music of Orpheus (which has been interpreted of his taming Savage Tempers)
will thus have a literal Application. The other, which we most insist upon, is,
that the Love which these Sages bear to the Females of our Kind affords a
Solution of all those Fables of the Gods compressing Women in Woods under
bestial appearances. I am sensible it may be objected, that they are said to
have been compressed in the Shape of different Animals; but to this we answer,
that Women under such apprehensions hardly know what shape they have to deal
with.

From what has been last said, it is highly credible that to this ancient and
generous Race the World is indebted, if not for the Heroes, at least for the
acutest Wits of Antiquity. One of the most remarkable instances, is that great
mimick Genius Vit. Aesop. initio.
Aesop, for whose extraction from these Sylvestres Homines we may gather an
Argument from Planudes, who says, that Aesop signifies the same thing as
Aethiop, the Original Nation of our People. For a second Argument we may offer
the description of his Person, which was short, deformed, and almost Savage,
insomuch that he might have lived in the Woods, had not the benevolence of his
Temper made him rather adapt himself to our Manners, and come to Court in
wearing Apparel. The third Proof is his acute and satirical Wit; and lastly,
his great Knowledge in the Nature of Beasts, together with the natural Pleasure
he took to speak of them upon all Occasions.

The next instance I shall produce is Vid. Plato and Xenophon.
Socrates. First, it was a Tradition that he was of an uncommon Birth from the
rest of Men; Secondly, he had a Countenance confessing the Line he sprung from,
being bald, flat-nos'd, with prominent Eyes, and a downward look: Thirdly, he
turned certain Fables of Aesop into Verse, probably out of his respect to
Beasts in general, and love to his Family in particular.

In process of time, the Women, with whom these Sylvans would have lovingly
cohabited, were either taught by Mankind, or induced by an abhorrence of their
Shapes, to shun their embraces; so that our Sages were necessitated to mix with
Beasts; This by degrees occasioned the Hair of their Posterity to grow higher
than their Middles; It arose in one Generation to their Arms, in the Second it
invaded their Necks, in the Third it gained the ascendant of their Heads, 'till
the degenerate Appearance in which the Species is now immersed, became
completed. Though we must here observe, that there were a few who fell not under
the common Calamity, there being some unprejudiced Women in every Age, by
virtue of whom a Total extinction of the Original Race was prevented: And it is
remarkable also, that even where they were mixed, the Defection from their
Nature was not entire; there still appeared mavelous Qualities among them, as
was manisest in those who followed Alexander in India. How did they attend his
Army and survey his Order! How did they cast themselves into the same forms for
March or for Combat! W^^^ an imitation was there of all his Discipline! the
ancient true remains of a warlike Disposition, and of that Constitution which
they enjoyed while they were a Monarchy.

To proceed to Italy: At the first Appearance of these wild Philosophers, there
were some of the least mixed, who vouchsafed to converse with Mankind; which is
evident from the Name of Livy.
Fauns, a fando, or speaking. Such was he who coming out of the Woods, in
hatred to Tyranny, encouraged the Roman Army to proceed against the Hetruscans
who would have restored Tarquin. But here, as in all the Western Parts of the
World, there was a great and memorable Era in which they began to be Silent.
This we may place something near the time of Aristotle, when the Number, Vanity
and Folly of Human Philosophers increased, by which Men's Heads became too much
puzzled to receive the Wisdom of these ancient Sylvans; the Questions of that
Academy were too numerous to be consistent with their ease to answer; and too
intricate, extravagant, idle, or pernicious, to be any other than a derision
and scorn unto them. From this Period, if ever we hear of their giving Answers,
it is only when caught, bound, and constrained, in like manner as was that
Ancient Grecian Prophet, Proteus.

Accordingly we read in Plutarch in Vit. Sylla.
Sylla's Time, of such a Philosopher taken near Dyrrachium, who would not be
persuaded to give them a Lecture by all they could say to him, and only showed
his Power in Sounds by Neighing like a Horse.

But a more successful attempt was made in Augustus's reign by the Inquisitive
Genius of the great Virgil, whom, together with Varus, the Commentators suppose
to have been the true Persons, who are related in the 6th Bucolick to have
caught a Philosopher, and doubtless a genuine one, of the Race of the old
Silenus. To prevail upon him to be communicative (of the importance of which
Virgil was well aware) they not only tied him fast, but allured him likewise by
making him a present of a comely Maiden called Aegle, which made him sing both
merrily and instructively. In this Song we have their Doctrine of the Creation,
the same in all probability as was taught so many Ages before in the great
Pygmaean Empire, and several Hieroglyphical Fables under which they couched or
embellished their Morals. For which reason I look upon this Bucolick as an
inestimable Treasure of the most ancient Science.

In the Reign of Constantine we hear of another, taken in a Net, and brought to
Alexandria, round whom the People flocked to hear his Wisdom; but as Ammianus
Marcellinus reports, he proved a dumb Philosopher, and only instructed by
Action.

The last we shall speak of who seems to be of the true Race, is said by St.
Jerome to have met St. Vit. St. Ant.
Anthony in a Desert, who enquiring the Way of him, he showed his
understanding, and Courtesy by pointing, but would not answer, for he was a
dumb Philosopher also.

These are all the Notices which I am at present able to gather of the
appearance of so great and learned a People in your side of the World. But if
we return to their ancient native Seats, Africa and India, we shall there find
even in modern times, the Traces of their Original Conduct and Valor.

In Africa (as we read among the indefatigable Mr. Purchas's Collections) a
Body of them whose Leader was inflamed with Love for a Woman, by martial Powers
and Stratagem won a Fort from the Portuguese.

But I must leave all others at present to celebrate the Praise of two of their
unparalled Monarchs in India. The one was Perimal the Magnificent, a Prince
most Learned and Communicative, to whom in Malabar their excess of Zeal
dedicated a Temple, raised on Seven hundred Pillars, not inferior in Maff. l. 1.
Maffaeus's Opinion to those of Agrippa in the Pantheon. The other Hanimant the
Mavelous his Relation and Successor, whose Knowledge was so great, as made
his followers doubt if even that Wise Species could arrive at such Perfection;
and therefore they rather imagined him and his Race a sort of Gods formed into
Apes. His was the Tooth which the Portuguese took in Bisnagar 1559, for which
the Indians offered, according to Linschot. chapter 44.
Linschotten, the immense Sum of Seven hundred thousand Ducats. Nor let me quit
this Head without mentioning with all due respect Oran Outang the Great, the
last of this Line: whose unhappy Chance it was to fall into the Hands of
Europeans. Oran Outang, whose Value was not known to us, for he was a mute
Philosopher: Oran Outang, by whose dissection the Learned Dr. Tyson has added a
Confirmation to this System, from the resemblance between the Homo Sylvestris
and our Humane Body, in those Organs by which the rational Soul is exerted.

We must now descend to consider this People, as sunk into the bruta Natura, by
their continual Commerce with Beasts. Yet even at this time, what Experiments
do they not afford us of relieving some from the Spleen, and others from
Imposthumes, by occasioning Laughter at proper Seasons? With what readiness do
they enter into the imitation of whatever is remarkable in Human Life? and what
surprising Relations have Le Comte and others given of their Appetites,
Actions, Conceptions, Affections, Varieties of Imaginations, and Abilities
capable of pursuing them? If under their present low circumstances of Birth and
Breeding, and in so short a Term of Life as is now allotted them, they so far
exceed all Beasts, and equal many Men; what Prodigies may we not conceive of
those, who were Nati melioribus annis, those Primitive Longaeval and
Antideluvian Man-Tegers, who first taught Sciences to the World?

This Account, which is entirely my own, I am proud to imagine has traced
Knowledge from a Fountain correspondent to several Opinions of the Ancients,
though hitherto undiscovered, both by them and the Moderns. And now what shall I
say to Mankind in the Thought of this great Discovery? What, but that they
should abate of their Pride, and consider that the Authors of our Knowledge are
among Beasts: That these, who were our elder Brothers by a Day in the Creation,
whose Kingdom was like the Scheme of Plato governed by Philosophers, who
flourished with Learning in Aethiopia and India, are now undistinguished from,
and known only by the same Appellation, as the Man-Teger, and the Monkey!

As to Speech, I make no question that there are Remains of the First and less
corrupted Race, in their Native Deserts, who yet have the Power of it. But the
vulgar Reason given by the Spaniards, "that they will not speak for fear of
being set to Work," is alone a sufficient one, considering how exceedingly all
other Learned Persons affect their Ease. A Second is, That these observant
Creatures having been Eyewitnesses of the Cruelty with which that Nation
treated their Brother Indians, find it necessary not to show themselves to be
Men, that they may be protected not only from Work, but from Cruelty also.
Thirdly, They could at best take no delight to converse with the Spaniards,
whose grave and sullen Temper is so averse to that natural and open
Cheerfulness, which is generally observed to accompany all true Knowledge.

But now were it possible, that any way could be found out to draw forth their
Latent Qualities, I cannot but think it would be highly serviceable to the
Learned World, both in respect of recovering past Knowledge, and promoting the
Future. Might there not be found certain gentle artful Methods, whereby to
endear us to them? Is there no Nation in the World, whose natural turn is
adapted to engage their Society, and win them by a sweet Similitude of Manners?
Is there no Nation where the Men might allure them by a distingushing Civility,
and in a manner fascinate them by assimilated Motions? No Nation, where the
Women with easy freedoms, and the gentlest Treatment, might oblige the loving
Creatures to sensible returns of Humanity? The Love I bear my native Country,
prompts me to wish this Nation might be Great Britain, but alas! in our present
wretched divided Condition, how can we hope that Foreigners of so great
Prudence, will freely declare their Sentiments, in the midst of violent
Parties, and at so vast a distance from their Friends, Relations, and Country?
The Affection I bear our Neighbour-State, would incline me to wish it were
Holland -- Sed laeva in part Mamillae Nil salit Arcadico. It Is from France
then we must expect this Restoration of Learning, whose late Monarch took the
Sciences under his Protection, and raised them to so great a Height. May we not
hope their Emissaries will some time or other have Instructions, not only to
invite Learned Men into their Country, but Learned Beasts, the true ancient
Man-Tegers, I mean of Aethopia and India? Might not the Talents of each Kind of
these be adapted to the Improvement of the several Sciences? The Man-Tegers to
instruct Heroes, Statesmen and Scholars? Baboons to teach the Courtiers,
Ceremony and Address? Monkeys, the Art of pleasing in Conversation and
agreeable Affectations, to Ladies and their Lovers? The Apes of less learning,
Comedians and Dancing Masters? The Marmosets Court Pages, and young English
Travelers. But the distinguishing each Kind, and allotting them to their
proper Business, I leave to the Inquisitive, and penetrating Genius, of the
Jesuits in their respective Missions.

Vale and Fruere. M. S.

VIRGILIUS RESTAURATUS: SEU MARTINI SCRIBLERI Summi Critici CASTIGATIONUM in
AENEIDEM SPECIMEN:
AENEIDEM to tam, Amice Lector, innumerabilibus poene mendis scaturientem, ad
pristinum sensum revocabimus. In singulis fere versibus spuriae occurrunt
lectiones, in omnibus quos unquam vidi codicibus, aut vulgatis aut ineditis, ad
opprobrium usque Criticorum in hune diem existentes. Interea adverte oculos,
and his paucis sruere. At si quae sint in hisce castigationibus, de quibus non
satis liquet, syllabarum quantitates, (...) nostra Libro ipsi prae sigenda, ut
consulas, monco.

I. SPECIMEN LIBRI PRIMI, VERSE. I.
ARMA Virumque cano, Trojae qui primas ab oris
Italiam, fato profugus, Lavinaque venit
Litora: multum ille and terris jactatus and alto,
Vi superum --
Arma Virumque cano, Trojae qui primus ab Aris
Italiam, flatu profugus, Latinaque venit
Litora: multum ille and terris vexatus, and alto,
Vi superum --
Ab aris, nempe Hercaei Jovis, vide lib. 2. verse. 512, 550. -- Flatu, ventorum
Aeoli, ut sequitur, -- Latina certe littora cum Aeneas aderat, Lavina non nisi
postea ab ipso nominata, Lib. 12. verse. 193. -- Jactatus, terris non convenit.
II. VERSE. 52.
-- Et quisquis Numen Junonis adoret?
-- Et quisquis Numen Junonis adoret?
Long melius, quam ut antea, Numen.
Et procul dubio sic Virgilius.
III. VERSE. 86.
-- Venti velut agmine facto
Qua data porta ruunt --
Venti velut aggere fracto
Qua data porta ruunt --
Sic corrige, meo periculo.
IV. VERSE. 117.
Fidumque vehebat Orontem.
Fortemque vehebat Orontem,
Non sidum, quia Epitheton Achatae notissimum,
Oronti nunquam datur.
V. VERSE. 119.
Excutitur, pronusque magister
Volvitur in caput --
-- Excutitur: pronusque magis for
Volvitur in caput --
Aio Virgilium aliter non scripsisse, quod plane confirmatur ex sequentibus --
Ast illum ter fiuctus ibidem Torquet --
VI. VERSE. 112.
Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto
Arma virum --
Armi hominum: Ridicule antea Arma virum, quae ex ferro conflata, quomodo
possunt natare?
VII. VERSE. 151.
Atque rotis summas leviter perlabitur undas.
Atque rotis spumas leviter perlabitur udas. Summas, and leviter perlabi,
pleonasmus est: Mirifice altera lectio Neptuni agilitatem and celeritatem
exprimit; simili modo Noster de Camilla, Aen. 11. -- intactae segetis per summa
volaret, etc. hyperbolice.
VIII. VERSE. 154.
Jamque faces and saxa volant, furor arma ministrat.
Jam faeces and saxa volant, fugiuntque Ministri: Uti solent, instanti periculo
-- Faeces, facibus long praestant; quid enim nisi faeces jactarent vulgus
sordidum?
IX. VERSE. 170.
Front sub adversa scopulis pendentibus antrum,
Intus aquae dulces, vivoque sedilia saxo.
Front sub adversa populis prandentibus antrum.
Sic malim, long potius quam scopulis pendentibus:
Nugae! Nonne vides versu sequenti dulces aquas ad potandum and sedilia ad
discumbendum dari? In quorum usum? quippe prandentium.
X. VERSE. 188.
-- Tres littore cervos
Prospicit errantes: hos tota armenta sequunter
A tergo --
-- Tres litore corvos
Aspicit errantes: hos agmina tota sequuntur
A tergo -- Cervi, lectio vulgata, absurditas notissima: haec Animalia in
Africa non inveniri, quis nescit? At motus and ambulandi ritus Corvorum quis
non agnovit hoc loco! Litore, locus ubi errant Corvi, uti Noster alibi,
Et sola secum sicca spaciatur arena.
Omen praeclarissimum, immo and agminibus Militum frequenter observatum, ut
patet ex Historicis.
XI. VERSE. 748.
Arcturum, pluviasque Hyades, geminosque Triones.
Error gravissimus. Corrige, -- septemque Triones.
XII. VERSE. 631.
Quare agite O juvenes, tectis succedite nostris.
Lectis potius dicebat Dido, polita magis oratione, and quae unica voce and
Torum and Mensam exprimebat: Hanc lectionem probe confirmat appellatio O
Juvenes: Duplicem hunc sensum alibi etiam Maro lepide innuit, Aen. 4. v. 19.
Huic uni forsan potui succumbere culpae:
Anna? fatebor enim --
Corrige, Huic uni [ Viro scil.] potui succumbere; Culpas
Anna? fatebor enim, etc.
Vox succumbere quam eleganter ambigua!
LIBER SECUNDUS. VEES. 1.
CONTICUERE omnes, intentique ora tenebant,
Inde toro Pater Aeneas sic orsus ab alto:
Concubuere omnes, intenteque ora tenebant; Inde toro satur Aeneas sic orsus ab
alto.
Concubuere, quia toro Aencam vidimus accumbentem: quin and altera ratio, scil.
Conticuere and ora tenebant, tautologice, dictum. In Manuscripto perquam
rarissimo in Patris Musaeo, legitur, ore gemebant; sed magis ingeniose quam
vere. -- Satur Aeneas, quippe qui jamjam a prandio surrexit: Pater nihil ad rem
attinet.
VERSE. 3.
Infandum Regina jubes renovare dolorem.
Infantum regina jubes renovare dolorem. Sic hand dubito veterrimis codicibus
scriptum fuisse. Hoe fatis constat ex perantiqua illa Britannorum Cantilena
vocata Chevy-chace, cujus author hune locum sibi ascivit in haec verba,
The Child may rue that is unborn.
VERSE. 4.
Trojanas ut opes, and lamentabile regnum.
Eruerint Danai --
Trojanas ut Oves and lamentabile regnum Diruerint -- Mallem oves potius quam
opes, quoniam in antiquissimis illis temporibus oves and armenta divisiae regum
fuere. Vel fortasse Oves Paradis innuit, quas super Idam nuperrime pascebat,
and jam in vindictam pro Helenae raptu, a Menelao, Ajace, aliisque ducibus,
merito occisas.
VERSE. 5.
-- Quaeque ipse miserrima vidi,
Et quorum pars magna fui.
-- Quoeque ipse miserrimus audi,
Et quorum pars magna fui --
Omnia tam audita quam visa recta distinctione enarrare hic Aeneas profitetur:
Multa quorum nox ea fatalis sola conscia fuit, Vir probus and pius tanquam visa
refer non potuit.
VERSE. 7.
-- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lacrymis?
-- Quis talia flendo,
Temperet in lachrymis? -- Major enim doloris indicatio, absque modo
lachrymare? quam solummodo a lachrymis non temperare.
VERSE. 9.
Et jam nox humida coelo
Praecipitat, suadentque cadentia sydera somnos.
Et jam nox lumina coelo
Praecipitat, suadentque latentia sydera somnos.
Lectio, humida, vespertinum rorem solum innuere videtur: magis mi arridet
Lumina, quae latentia postquam praecipitantur, Aurorae adventum annunciant.
VERSE. 11.
Sed si tantus amor casus cognoscere nostros,
Et breviter Trojae supremum audire laborem,
Sed si tantus amor curas cognoscere noctis,
Et brevi ter Trojae Superumque audire labores.
Curae Noctis (scilicet noctis Excidii Trojani) magis compendiose (vel ut dixit
ipse breviter) totam belli catastrophen denotat, quam diffusa illa and
indeterminata lectio, casus nostros. -- Ter audire gratum fuisse Didoni, patet
ex libro quarto, ubi dicitur, Iliacosque iterum demens audire labores Exposcit:
Ter enim pro saepe usurpatur. Trojae, superumque labores, recte, quia non
tantum homines sed and Dii sese his laboribus immiscuerunt. Vide Aen. 2. verse.
610, etc.
VERSE. 13.
Quanquam animus meminisse horret, luctuque resugit,
Incipiam.
Quamquam animus meminisse horret, luctusque resurgit. Resurgit multo proprius
dolorem renascentem ^^tat, quam ut hactenus, resugit.
VERSE. 14.
Fracti bello, fatisque repulsi,
Ductores Danaum, tot jam la entibus annis,
Instar montis Equum, divina Palladis art,
Aedificant -- etc.
Tracti bello, fatisque repulsi.
Tracti and Repulsi, Antithesis perpulchra! attracti frigide and vulgariter.
Equum jam Trojanum, (ut vulgus loquiter) adeamus: quem si Equam Graecam
vocabis Lector, minime pecces: Solae enim femellae utero gestant. -- Uterumque
armato milite complent -- Uteroque recusse Insonuere cavae -- Atque utero
sonitum quater arma dedere. -- Inclusos utero Danaos, etc. Vox faeta non
convenit maribus, -- Scandit fatalis machina muros, Foeta armis -- Palladem
Virginem, Equo mari fabricando invigilare decuisse, quis putat? Incredibile
prorsus! Quamobrem existimo veram Equae lectionem passim restituendam, nisi ubi
forte, metri caussa, Equum potius quam Equam, Genus pro Sexu, dixit Maro. Vale!
dum haec paucula corriges, majus opus moveo.
M. S.

It cannot Rain but it Pours: OR, LONDON strow'd with Rarities.
BEING, An ACCOUNT of the Arrival of a White Bear, at the House of Mr. Ratcliff
in Bishopsgate-Street: As also of the Faustina, the celebrated Italian Singing
Woman; And of the Copper-Farthing Dean from Ireland.
And Lastly, Of the wonderful Wild Man that was nursed in the Woods of Germany
by a Wild Beast, hunted and taken in Toyls; how he behaveth himself like a dumb
Creature, and is a Christian like one of us, being called Peter; and how he was
brought to Court all in green, to the great Astonishment of the Quality and
Gentry, 1726.
WE shall begin with a Description of Peter the Savage, deferring our other
Curiosities to some following Papers.

Romulus and Remus, the two famous wild Men of Antiquity, and Orsin that of the
Moderns, have been justly the Admiration of all Mankind: Nor can we presage
less of this wild Youth, as may be gathered from that famous and well known
Prophecy of Lilly's, which being now accomplished, is most easily interpreted.
When Rome shall wend to Benevento,
And Espagne breaking the Assiento;
When Eagle Split shall fly to China,
And Christian Folks adore Faustina:
Then shall an Oak be brought to Bed,
Of Creature neither taught nor fed;
Great Feats shall he atchieve --


The Pope is now going to Benevento: the Spaniards having broke their Treaty;
the Emperor Trades to China; and Lilly, were he alive, must be convinced, that
it was not the Empress Faustina that was meant in the Prophecy.

It is evident by several Tokens about this wild Gentleman, that he had a
Father and Mother like one of us; but there being no Register of his
Christening, his Age is only to be guessed at by his Stature and Countenance,
and appears to be about Twelve or Thirteen. His being so young was the
Occasion of the great Disappointment of the Ladies, who came to the Drawing
Room in full Expectation of some Attempt upon their Chastity: So far is true,
that he endeavored to Kiss the young Lady W^le, who for that reason is become
the Envy of the Circle; this being a Declaration of Nature, in favor of her
superior Beauty.

Aristotle says, That Man is the most Mimick of all Animals; which Opinion of
that great Philosopher is strongly confirmed by the Behavior of this wild
Gentleman, who is endowed with that Quality to an extreme Degree. He received
his first Impressions at Court: His Manners are, first to lick People's Hands,
and then turn his Breech upon them; to thurst his Hand into every body's
Pocket; to climb over People's Heads; and even to make use of the Royal Hand,
to take what he has a mind to. At his first Appearance he seized on the Lord
Chamberlain's Staff, and put on his Hat before the King; from whence some have
conjectured, that he is either descended from a Grandee of Spain, or the Earls
of Kingsale in Ireland. However, these are manifest Tokens of his innate
Ambition; he is extremely tenacious of his own Property, and ready to invade
that of other People. By this mimick Quality he discovered what wild Beast had
nursed him: Observing Children to ask Blessing of their Mothers, one Day he
fell down upon his Knees to a Sow, and muttered some Sounds in that humble
Posture.

It has been commonly thought, that he is Ulrick's natural Brother, because of
some resemblance of Manners, and the officious Care of Ulrick about him; but
the Superiority of the Parts and Genius in Peter, demonstrates this to be
impossible.

Though he is ignorant both of ancient and modern Languages, (that Care being
left to the ingenious Physician, who is entrusted with his Education) yet he
distinguishes Objects by certain Sounds framed to himself, which Mr. Rotenberg,
who brought him over, understands perfectly. Beholding one day the Shambles
with great Fear and Astonishment, ever since he calls Man by the same Sound
which expresses Wolf. A young Lady is a Peacock, old Women Mag-pyes and Owls;
a Beau with a Toupee, a Monkey; Glass, Ice; Blue, Red, and Green Ribbons, he
calls Rainbows; an Heap of Gold a Turd. The first Ship he saw, he took to be a
great Beast swimming on her Back, and her Feet tied above her: The Men that
came out of the Hold he took to be her Cubs, and wondered they were so unlike
their Dam. He understands perfectly the Language of all Beasts and Birds, and
is not, like them, confined to that of one Species. He can bring any Beast what
he calls for, and no doubt is much missed now in his Native Woods, where he
used to do good Offices among his Fellow Citizens, and served as a Mediator to
reconcile their Differences. One Day he warned a Flock of Sheep that were
driving to the Shambles, of their Danger, and upon uttering some Sounds, they
all fled. He takes vast Pleasure in Conversation with Horses; and going to the
Meuse to converse with two of his intimate Acquaintances in the King's Stable,
as he passed by, he Neighed to the horse at Charing Cross; being as it were
surpised to see him so high, he seemed to take it ill that the Horse did not
answer him; but I think no body can undervalue his Understanding for not being
skilled in Statuary.

He expresses his Joy most commonly by Neighing; and whatever the Philosophers
may talk of their Risibility, Neighing is a more Noble Expression of that
Passion than Laughing, which seems to me to have something Silly in it; and
besides, is often attended with Tears. Other Animals are sensible they debase
themselves, by mimicking Laughter; and I take it to be a general Observation,
that the top Felicity of Mankind is to imitate Monkeys, and Birds: Witness
Hartequins, Scaramouches and Masquerades; on the other Hand, Monkeys, when they
would look extremely silly, endeavor to bring themselves down to Mankind. Love
he expresses by the Cooing of a Dove, and Anger by the Croaking of a Raven,
and it is not doubted but that he will serve in Time as an Interpreter between
us and other Animals.

Great Instruction is to be had from this wild Youth in the knowledge of
Simples; and I am of Opinion, that he ought always to attend the Censors of the
College in their Visitation of Apothecaries Shops.

I am told that the new Sect of Herb-eaters intend to follow him into the
Fields, or to beg him for a Clerk of their Kitchen: And that there are many of
them now thinking of turning their Children into Woods to Graze with the
Cattle, in hopes to raise a healthy and moral Race, refined from the
Corruptions of this Luxurious World.

He sings naturally several pretty Tunes of his own Composing, and with equal
Facility, in the Chromatick, Inharmonick, and Diatonick Style, and consequently
must be of infinite Use to the Academy, in judging of the Merits of their
Composers, and is the only Person that ought to decide betwixt Cuzzoni and
Faustina.

I cannot omit his first Notion of Clothes, which he took to be the natural
Skins of the Creatures that wore them, and seemed to be in great Pain for the
pulling off a Stocking, thinking the poor Man was a Fleaing.

I am not ignorant that there are disaffected People, who say he is a
Pretender, and no genuine wild Man. This Calumny proceeds from the false
Notions they have of wild Men, which they frame from such as they see about the
Town, whose Actions are rather absurd than wild; therefore it will be incumbent
on all young Gentlemen, who are ambitious to excel in this Character, to Copy
this true Original of Nature.

The Senses of this wild Man are vastly more acute than those of a tame One; he
can follow the Track of a Man, or any other Beast of Prey. A Dog is an Ass to
him for finding Troufles; his Hearing is more perfect, because his Ears not
having been confined by Bandages, he can move them like a Drill, and turn them
toward the Sonorous Object.

Let us pray the Creator of all Beings, Wild and Tame, that as this wild Youth,
by being brought to Court, has been made a Christian; so such as are at Court,
and are no Christians, may lay aside their Savage and Rapacious Nature, and
return to the Meekness of the Gospel.

An INFALIBLE SCHEME To Pay the PUBLIC DEBT OF IRELAND in Six Months.
THE great Distress of this unhappy Country, is too visible to all, except
those who have Power to redress it.

We may observe through the whole Nation one universal Complaint of the Decay of
Trade, the Oppression of Landlords, and the Deficiency of Money; and yet I
cannot find among all the Schemes proposed to lessen these Evils, any one in
particular, which seems likely to succeed.

But, what is still an Addition to this melancholy Prospect of Affairs, is the
unbounded Luxury and Extravagance, both in Apparel and Entertaiments, which
Persons of all Ranks and Degrees run into at present, though in general we labor
under such Hardships and Poverty.

We are affected in a quite different Manner from all the Nations upon Earth;
for, with others, Wealth is the Mother of Luxury, but with us Poverty has the
very same Effect: With others, Scarcity is the Parent of Industry, but with us
it is the Nurse of Idleness and Vice.

We labor to imitate our neighboring Kingdoms in nothing but their
Extravagance, without having the same plentiful Aids of Commerce, or applying
ourselves to the Study of Fair-dealing to maintain it. So that, in short, by
our own ill Management, we are brought to so low an Ebb of Wealth and Credit,
that our Condition seems incapable of any Relief.

But as I have the Interest of this misguided People very much at Heart, I do
not intend this Essay as a Detection of their present Grievances, but as a
Remedy against them. And for that Purpose I have labored to find out such a
Scheme as will discharge our public Debt with all possible Ease and Pleasure
to the Subject, and in so short a Time, that we may neither complain of being
oppressed with long continued Taxes, (as some unreasonable People often presume
to do) nor quite despair of being once more in a thriving Condition.

Let us consider what those Vices are, which at present prevail most among us;
and I believe, upon Enquiry, they will be found Perjury, Fornication,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Slander, Infidelity, Fraud, Blasphemy, and many others.
Would it not then be worthy of our Consideration whether a moderate Tax upon
every particular Vice, instead of laying an additional Duty upon Wine, Hops,
and other Commodities, would not supply us with a sufficient Sum in a very
short Time? Such a Tax must of Necessity yield a vast Revenue, and prove the
most infallible, and indeed the only Scheme for our Prosperity, if it shall be
thought proper to be continued.

But, before I proceed to Particulars, it may not be amiss to premise, that
this Tax is not designed for any one County or Province in this Kingdom, but to
extend itself universally over the whole Nation; because different Vices may
flourish in different Counties, as different Plants in their different Soils;
as Perjury in one, Theft in another, Dissimulation and Flattery in another,
Rapine in another, and so of the rest: However, I take Theft to be our peculiar
staple Vice.

And least any Disputes may hereafter arise about the Nature of Perjury, the
Intention of the Act in this particular, or what Persons are to be subject to
this Tax, I must here also premise, that every Lie confirmed by an Oath, is
undoubtedly Perjury, whether before a Magistrate, or behind a Counter. And,
therefore, we do not doubt, but the Trading Part of our People, will be great
Benefactors to the Public, in this particular Article, as well as many others.

These two Things being premised, let us suppose that in this large Country,
5000 Persons are guilty of this Infirmity each Day-Which Computation must be
allowed very moderate, if we recollect that this Number is not above a
four-hundredth Part of the Inhabitants of this Kingdom, who are generally
computed to amount to Two Millions. And if we further consider what strong
Inducements our Natives have to practice it, from its being often so exceeding
beneficial; if we consider the great Use made of it in all Sorts of Traffic;
the great Demands for it in Lawsuits; the great Advantage of it in Elections,
and the undeniable Profit of it in all Prosecutions, we shall think the Number
of 5000 still more reasonable.

Let us then suppose every one of this Number to be perjured, only once every
Day, (which is a very favorable Supposition) and subject only to a Tax of
Sixpence for each Offense; for which Sum, perhaps, he may procure either the
Death of an Enemy, an Estate for his Friend, or a Fortune for himself, (all
which are esteemed very desirable) the Tax will be too inconsiderable to make
any one murmur, and yet will yield the Sum of 125 l. per Day, toward
discharging our National Debt.

Besides, this Tax, though very low, may in Reality be very profitable for
Mankind; for Attorneys, Sollicitors, Usurers, Butchers, and other honest
Traders, will scarce think it answerable to the Expense of Time, to forswear
themselves for any Profit from One Penny to Six Pence inclusive, (as now
customary) but will at least, for every Transgression, expect to gain
sufficient to defray the Tax.

However, I would have all sworn Constables, and all Collectors of this and
many other Taxes, entirely exempted from any Penalty as priviledg'd Persons;
because by that Means they will be enabled to be very serviceable in their
several Stations.

Fornication, as the World is at present, would furnish the Public with a
large Sum, even at a very moderate Tax; for it is now made an essential Part of
the polite Gentleman's Character, and he that has prevailed on the greatest
Number, proportionably rises in Reputation.

Let us then compute that in the several Parts of this Nation, 5000 per Day,
were liable to be taxed for this general Vice, only at two Shillings: The Sum
arising from this to the public Good, will amount to 500 l. per Day, and in
Six Months to almost one Third of our National Debt.

I know it may be here objected, that I have computed upon too small a Number,
and that I might justly account rather upon Twenty or Thirty Thousand per Day,
in the several Counties of this Kingdom: But, though I own this Objection to be
very strong, if we were to consider the Opportunities of Wakes, Patron-Days,
Haymaking Seasons, May-Days, Religious Pilgrimages to Holy Wells, Balls public
and private, and many other commodious Scenes for that kind of Entertainment;
yet I would rather choose to err on the right Side in too small, than too great
a Computation.

I know the Popish Clergy will make strong Remonstrances against this Tax; and
plead, that it is designed to oppress them; that all Nations of the Earth allow
them a Toleration in this particular Point, as they are frail Mortals, and
sworn to Celibacy; and what is still worse, that such a Tax would be the most
effectual Means to drain them of their whole Revenues; but as I would not have
such pious Persons justly complain of the least Rigor, I shall readily agree
to their being exempted.

Drunkenness I would only Tax at Six Pence, because it might be prejudicial to
His Majesty's Revenue, to discourage it, and consequently subject the Proposer
to Penalties.

Let us then compute, that only Twenty Thousand Persons, (which is but one
hundredth Part of the People in this Kingdom) were daily liable to be taxed,
the Amount would be 500 l. per Day. And how extremely moderate this Computation
is, may appear to any one who considers, that besides the usual Opportunities
of Taverns, and private Houses, there are Elections, Fairs, Mayor's Feasts,
University Treats, Corporation Dinners, Christmas Regales, Weddings and
Christnings, both in Town and Country, and many other irresistible Inducements
to this manly Vice, which would, perhaps, if nicely calculated, daily furnish
us with two Thirds more than our computed Number, and by that Means greatly
conduce to the Public Good.

But, however, I would by all Means exempt all Country Justices of the Peace,
whether Squires or Parsons: because it would be unseemly to see such honorable
and reverend Personages insulted by meaner Officers, as often as they might be
discovered in such a Condition.

Swearing would be a most universal Benefit in this Case; because, at present,
it serves to season the Discourse of all Ranks and Degrees of Men. It is the
principal Ingredient and Decoration of all modern Jokes, Gibes, Quarrels,
Love-Speeches, Disputes, Threats and Promises, and consequently capable of
affording an incredible Revenue.

However, let us suppose 40000 Persons per Day, liable to the Tax of Six Pence
only for each Offense of this Kind; which, considering the great Number of
Markets, Coffee-Houses, Shambles, Barracks, and Gaming-Houses in this Kingdom,
is a very inconsiderable Number; yet even this Article will furnish us with
1000 l. per Day, which would amount to near two Thirds of the public Debt.

Our Laws have amerced each Offense in this way at One Shilling, ordering one
half to the Informer, and the other to the Poor, which, in my humble Opinion,
was very ill concerted; for if the Legislature did really intend that this Law
should be punctually enforced, they ought to have divided the whole Mulct
between the Informer and the Justice, without any regard to the Poor, and then,
they might be assured, it would be vigorously executed.

I am already apprehensive, that all military Persons will expect an Exemption
from Taxes on this Account; because they may plead Precedents for many
Generations, may allege the Power of Custom, the Decency and Comeliness of it,
when properly mingled with other Discourse, or that the censorious World would
perhaps suspect they knew nothing of God at all, if they did not sometimes
mention his Name; and many other Reasons of equal Weight: But though these
Remonstrances are very just, yet as this is the only Means by which, some think
a Standing Army can conduce to the national Good, it will be hard to exempt
them.

However, as the military Power would infallibly be liable to this Tax in all
its Branches, by which Means they might be utterly impoverished, I believe it
may not be improper to allow all Foot-Soldiers and Field-Officers, all young
Ensigns, spruce Cornets, naval Captains, Cabin-Boys and Quarter Masters, forty
or fifty Oaths a Day, entirely free from any Tax or Penalty.

As for Slander, supposing only twenty thousand per Day, taxed at Six Pence for
every Offense, this Article would daily afford the Public (at the lowest
reasonable Computation) five hundred Pounds.

And, as this is a favorite Talent, we might have ventured to tax it much
higher; but I would not seem to discourage so charitable a Disposition,
especially where it may promote the Interest of my Country.

As to the Ladies, I have been always too great an Admirer of theirs, to desire
any Restriction should be laid on their Pleasure, either private or public;
and therefore I would have them taxed only half as much as the Men for every
little Error of this Kind; because Slander, in Men, is a Talent unnatural and
acquired, and generally practiced to ingratiate themselves with the opposite
Sex; whereas this genteel Failing in Females, is innate, and impossible to be
restrained; which is a Case that demands our utmost Compassion.

I think all Drawing-Rooms, Assemblies, and all Places of public Resort for
Ladies, ought to be exempt from any Penalty, because it is so material a Part
of the Discourse and Amusement of those Places, that to tax them for each
Offense, would be in Effect, to enjoin them perpetual Silence; which, if it
were possible, would be too great a Misfortune, both to themselves and the
World, to be exacted from them.

Infidelity and Blasphemy would furnish us with a considerable Sum; and as they
are not originally of our own Growth, but annually imported from neighboring
Kingdoms, they ought to be subject to some Duty, which in few Years would
probably be a vast Addition to the public Revenue. Yet as this Traffic is
principally carried on by young Lawyers, and traveling Squires, any Attempt to
tax it would certainly meet with too vigorous an Opposition. But on condition
it might pass into a Law, I would gladly exempt both Lawyers of all Ages,
Subaltern, and Field-Officers, young Heirs, Dancing-Masters, Pick-Pockets, and
Players,

Let us now only consider the several Sums arising from the Tax on our Vices,
as we have before computed them, and the Justness and Infallibility of this
Scheme must appear demonstrably. l. The public Debt of this Nation is about
300000 And the Tax l. per Day, For Perjury, 125 Fornication, 500 Drunkenness,
500 Swearing, 1000 Slander, 500 Total per Day 2625 which in 182 Days or half a
Year, will amount to 477,750 l. which is considerably more than our National
Debt.

But, left by the universal Poverty of our People, which is much to be feared,
or by their growing more virtuous, which never can be reasonably apprehended,
this daily Income should fall short of what we have computed, I must humbly beg
Leave to offer some other Improvements of this Scheme, which will undoubtedly
answer all Deficiencies.

And for this Purpose, what if a severe Tax was laid on all manner of Persons
who presumed to marry 'till they were full Forty Years old? If any should prove
Foolhardy enough to transgress a Law so calculated for the Happiness of Men,
each Offense would be of signal Benefit to the Public; and if providentially
it should prove an effectual Restraint, there must of Necessity be fewer
Children in each Family, and of Consequence the Number of Beggars and Wretches
in this Kingdom must proportionably decrease. And what would still be more
material, perhaps, in one Age, if this beneficial Act should be continued, the
greatest part of this Country would require to be new peopled from E^d; a
Circumstance greatly to be wished; because such an Accident would probably cure
that Nation of its inveterate Antipathy to the Inhabitants of this, at least
for some Generations.

As for the Scheme to tax Batchelors, which has lately been proposed to the
House by one of its Honorable Members, I must beg leave to think it highly
improper; because batchelors, of all Ranks and Degrees, are real Benefactors to
the Public, by not furnishing it either with Beggars, or Oppressors of
Beggars, one of which must infallibly be the Consequence of Marriage in this
Country.

I would also earnestly request, that all young Clergymen, who, with more
Passion than Prudence, shall dare to marry before they are beneficed, may be
liable to a most severe Tax, equal to a Prohibition; because such Offenders
must inevitably multiply Beggars, live in Contempt, and die in Poverty.

These, and many other Expedients, might easily be found upon any Emergency to
furnish considerable Sums for the National Debt.

But as there will remain about 177,750 l. over and above our public Debt, I
will allow One Hundred Thousand Pounds of it for Sallaries, to such Persons as
shall be appointed Collectors, and I hope this will be a reasonable Provision,
though generally above one half of every Tax is expended in paying proper
Officers to collect it. The Overplus may be deposited in the Treasury for any
other pious Use.

And if this Scheme should be so fortunate as to succeed, as I have no Reason
to doubt from the present Disposition of the H^ of C^s, all those Noblemen who
shall be appointed Commissioners, will have excellent Opportunities of
promoting their Nephews, Cousins, Footmen, Fosterers, Valets, and other
valuable Dependants, to good Incomes, and Places of Trust and Credit. But I
would, by all Means, have none but Englishmen nominated to be Tax Gatherers;
because we may rationally suppose, that they will be entirely free from
Prejudice, in Favor of the Natives of this Kingdom.

Thus would a moderate Tax upon our Vices apparently contribute to save this
Nation from utter Ruin. Many Persons who have not the least Excuse for their
Irregularities at present, (except the commendable Publick-spirited Contempt
for Religion) might then plead in their own Defense, that their Immoralities
had preserved their Country. And by this Means we might be furnished with a
Multitude of Patriots, who probably would never prove so in any other Respect.

But I must humbly beg leave to dissent from that religious Gentleman, the
excellent Author of the Fable of the Bees; though, perhaps, such a
Particularity of Opinion may injure my Character with several of my
Lay-brethren of most Professions; and I must publicly declare, that there can
be no other Method half so good as mine, to make Private Vices Public Benefits.

A MODEST PROPOSAL FOR Preventing the Children of poor people in Ireland, from
being a Burden to their Parents or Country, and for making them Beneficial to
the Public.
IT is a melancholy Object to those, who walk through this great Town or travel
in the Country, when they see the Streets, the Roads and Cabbin-doors crowded
with Beggars of the Female Sex, followed by three, four, or six Children, all
in Rags, and importuning every Passenger for an Alms. These Mothers instead of
being able to work for their honest livelihood, are forced to employ all their
time in Stroling to beg Sustenance for their helpless Infants, who, as they
grow up, either turn Thieves for want of Work, or leave their dear Native
Country, to fight for the Pretender in Spain, or sell themselves to the
Barbados.

I think it is agreed by all Parties, that this prodigious number of Children
in the Arms, or on the Backs, or at the Heels of their Mothers, and frequently
of their Fathers, is in the present deplorable state of the Kingdom, a very
great additional Grievance; and therefore whoever could find out a fair, cheap
and easy method of making these Children sound and useful Members of the
Commonwealth, would deserve so well of the Public, as to have his Statue set
up for a Preserver of the Nation.

But my Intention is very far from being confined to provide only for the
Children of professed Beggars, it is of a much greater Extent, and shall take
in the whole Number of Infants at a certain Age, who are born of Parents in
effect as little able to support them, as those who demand our Charity in the
Streets.

As to my own Part, having turned my Thoughts, for many Years, upon this
important Subject, and maturely weighed the several Schemes for no Projectors,
I have always found them grossly mistaken in their Computation. It is true, a
Child just dropped from its Dam, may be supported by her Milk, for a Solar Year
with little other Nourishment, at most not above the Value of two Shillings,
which the Mother may certainly get, or the Value in Scraps, by her lawful
Occupation of Begging; and it is exactly at one Year Old that I propose to
provide for them in such a Manner, as, instead of being a Charge upon their
Parents, or the Parish, or wanting Food and Raiment for the rest of their
Lives, they shall, on the Contrary, contribute to the feeding, and partly to
the Clothing of many Thousands.

There is likewise another great Advantage in my Scheme, that it will prevent
those voluntary Abortions, and that horrid Practice of Women murdering their
Bastard Children, alas! too frequent among us, Sacrificing the poor innocent
Babes, I doubt, more to avoid the Expense than the Shame, which would move
Tears and Pity in the most savage and inhuman Breast.

The number of Souls in this Kingdom being usually reckoned one Million and a
half. Of these I calculate there may be about two hundred thousand Couple whose
Wives are Breeders; from which number I substract thirty Thousand Couples, who
are able to maintain their own Children, although I apprehend there cannot be
so many, under the present Distresses of the Kingdom; but this being granted,
there will remain an hundred and seventy Thousand Breeders. I again substract
fifty Thousand, for those Women who miscarry, or whose Children die by
accident, or disease within the Year. There only remain an hundred and twenty
thousand Children of poor Parents annually born: The question therefore is, How
this number shall be reared, and provided for? which, as I have already said,
under the present Situation of Affairs, is utterly impossible by all the
Methods hitherto proposed; for we can neither employ them in Handicraft or
Agriculture; we neither build Houses, (I mean in the Country) nor cultivate
Land: They can very seldom pick up a Livelihood by Stealing 'till they arrive
at six years old; except where they are of towardly parts; although, I confess,
they learn the Rudiments much earlier; during which time they can however be
properly looked upon only as Probationers; as I have been informed by a
principal Gentleman in the County of Cavan, who protested to me, that he never
knew above one or two Instances under the Age of six, even in a part of the
Kingdom so renowned for the quickest Proficiency in that Art.

I am assured by our Merchants, that a Boy or a Girl before twelve years old,
is no saleable Commodity, and even when they come to this Age, they will not
yield above three Pounds, or three Pounds and half a Crown at most, on the
Exchange; which cannot turn to Account either to the Parents or Kingdom, the
Charge of Nutriment and Rags having been at least four times that Value.

I shall now therefore humbly propose my own Thoughts, which I hope will not be
liable to the least Objection.

I have been assured by a very knowing American of my Acquaintance in London,
that a young healthy Child well Nursed, is, at a Year old, a most delicious
nourishing and wholesome Food, whether Stewed, Roasted, Baked, or Boiled, and I
make no doubt that it will equally serve in a Fricasie, or a Ragoust.

I do therefore humbly offer it to public Consideration, that of the Hundred
and twenty thousand Children, already computed, twenty thousand may be reserved
for Breed, whereof only one fourth Part to be Males; which is more than we
allow to Sheep, black Cattle, or Swine, and my Reason is, that these Children
are seldom the Fruits of Marriage, a Circumstance not much regarded by our
Savages, therefore, one Male will be sufficient to serve four Females. That the
remaining Hundred thousand may at a Year old, be offered in Sale to the Persons
of Quality and Fortune, through the Kingdom, always advising the Mother to let
them Suck plentifully in the last Month, so as to render them Plump, and Fat
for a good Table. A Child will make two Dishes at an Entertainment for Friends,
and when the Family dines alone, the fore or hind Quarter will make a
reasonable Dish, and seasoned with a little Pepper or Salt will be very good
Boiled on the fourth Day, especially in Winter.

I have reckoned upon a Medium, that a Child just born will weigh 12 Pounds,
and in a solar Year, if tolerably nursed, increases to 28 Pounds.

I grant this food will be somewhat dear, and therefore very proper for
Landlords, who, as they have already devoured most of the Parents, seem to have
the best Title to the Children.

Infant's flesh will be in Season throughout the Year, but more plentiful in
March, and a little before and after; for we are told by a grave Author, an
eminent French Physician, that Fish being a prolifick Diet, there are more
Children born in Roman Catholic Countries about nine Months after Lent, than
at any other Season; therefore reckoning a Year after Lent, the Markets will be
more glutted than usual, because the Number of Popish Infants, is at least
three to one in this Kingdom, and therefore it will have one other Collateral
Advantage, by lessening the Number of Papists among us.

I have already computed the Charge of nursing a Beggar's Child (in which List
I reckon all Cottagers, Laborers, and four-fifths of the Farmers) to be about
two Shillings per Annum, Rags included; and I believe no Gentleman would repine
to give Ten Shillings for the Carcass of a good fat Child, which, as I have
said, will make four Dishes of excellent Nutritive Meat, when he has only some
particular Friend, or his own Family to dine with him. Thus the Squire will
learn to be a good Landlord, and grow popular among his Tenants, the Mother
will have Eight Shillings neat Profit, and be fit for Work 'till she produces
another Child.

Those who are more thrifty (as I must confess the Times require) may flea the
Carcass; the Skin of which, Artificially dressed, will make admirable Gloves,
for Ladies, and Summer Boots for fine Gentlemen.

As to our City of Dublin, Shambles may be appointed for this purpose, in the
most convenient Parts of it, and Butchers we may be assured will not be
wanting; although I rather recommend buying the Children alive, and dressing
them hot from the Knife, as we do roasting Pigs.

A very worthy Person, a true Lover of his Country, and whose Virtues I highly
esteem, was lately pleased, in discoursing on this Matter, to offer a
Refinement upon my Scheme. He said, that many Gentlemen of this Kingdom, having
of late destroyed their Deer, he conceived that the Want of Venison might be
well supplied by the Bodies of young Lads and Maidens, not exceeding fourteen
Years of Age, nor under twelve; so great a Number of both Sexes in every
Country being now ready to starve for want of Work and Service: And these to be
disposed of by their Parents if alive, or otherwise by their nearest Relations.
But with due deference to so excellent a Friend, and so deserving a Patriot, I
cannot be altogether in his Sentiments; for as to the Males, my American
Acquaintance assured me from frequent Experience, that their Flesh was
generally Tough and Lean, like that of our Schoolboys, by continual Exercise,
and their Taste disagreeable, and to fatten them would not answer the Charge.
Then as to the Females, it would, I think, with humble Submission, be a Loss to
the Public, because they soon would become Breeders themselves: And besides,
it is not improbable that some scrupulous People might be apt to Censure such a
Practice, (although indeed very unjustly) as a little bordering upon Cruelty,
which, I confess, has always been with me the strongest Objection against any
Project, how well soever intended.

But in order to justify my Friend, he confessed, that this Expedient was put
into his Head by the famous Sallmanaazor, a Native of the Island Formosa, who
came from thence to London, above twenty Years ago, and in Conversation told my
Friend, that in his Country, when any young Person happened to be put to Death,
the Executioner sold the Carcass to Persons of Quality, as a prime Dainty, and
that, in his Time, the Body of a plump Girl of fifteen, who was crucified for
an Attempt to poison the Emperor, was sold to his Imperial Majesty's prime
Minister of State, and other great Mandarins of the Court, in Joints from the
Gibbet, at four hundred Crowns. Neither indeed can I deny, that if the same Use
were made of several plump young Girls in this Town, who without one single
Groat to their Fortunes, cannot stir abroad without a Chair, and appear at a
Playhouse, and Assemblies in foreign Fineries, which they never will pay for;
the Kingdom would not be the worse.

Some Persons of a desponding Spirit are in great Concern about that vast
Number of poor People, who are Aged, Diseased, or Maimed, and I have been
desired to employ my Thoughts what Course may be taken, to ease the Nation of
so grievous an Encumbrance. But I am not in the least Pain upon that Matter,
because it is very well known, that they are every Day dying, and rotting, by
Cold and Famine, and Filth, and Vermin, as fast as can be reasonably expected.
And as to the young Laborers, they are now in almost as hopeful a Condition.
They cannot get Work, and consequently pine away for want of Nourishment, to a
degree, that if at any Time they are accidentally hired to common Labor, they
have not Strength to perform it, and thus the Country and themselves are
happily delivered from the Evils to come.

I have too long digressed, and therefore shall return to my Subject, I think
the Advantages by the Proposal which I have made are obvious and many, as well
as of the highest Importance.

For First, as I have already observed, it would greatly lessen the Number of
Papists, with whom we are Yearly overrun, being the principal Breeders of the
Nation, as well as our most dangerous Enemies, and who stay at home on purpose
with a Design to deliver the Kingdom to the Pretender, hoping to take their
Advantage by the Absence of so many good Protestants, who have chosen rather to
leave their Country, than stay at home, and pay Tithes against their
Conscience, to an Episcopal Curate.

Scecondly, The poorer Tenants will have something valuable of their own, which
by Law may be made liable to Distress, and help to pay their Landlord's Rent,
their Corn and Cattle being already seized, and Money a thing unknown.

Thirdly, Whereas the Maintenance of an hundred thousand Children, from two
Years old, and upwards, cannot be computed at less than Ten Shillings a piece
per Annum, the Nation's Stock will be thereby increased fifty thousand Pounds
per Annum, besides the Profit of a new Dish, introduced to the Tables of all
Gentlemen of Fortune in the Kingdom, who have any Refinement in Taste, and the
Money will circulate among our Selves, the Goods being entirely of our own
Growth and Manufacture.

Fourthly, The constant Breeders, besides the Gain of eight Shillings Sterling
per Annum, by the Sale of their Children, will be rid of the Charge of
maintaining them after the first Year.

Fifthly, This Food would likewise bring great Custom to Taverns, where the
Vintners will certainly be so prudent as to procure the best Receipts for
dressing it to Perfection; and consequently have their Houses frequented by all
the fine Gentlemen, who justly value themselves upon their Knowledge in good
Eating; and a skilful Cook, who understands how to oblige his Guests, will
contrive to make it as expensive as they please.

Sixthly, This would be a great Inducement to Marriage, which all wise Nations
have either encouraged by Rewards, or enforced by Laws and Penalties. It would
increase the Care and Tenderness of Mothers toward their Children, when they
were sure of a Settlement for Life, to the poor Babes, provided in some Sort by
the Public, to their annual Profit instead of Expense; we should soon see an
honest Emulation among the married Women, which of them could bring the fattest
Child to the Market. Men would become as fond of their Wives, during the Time
of their Pregnancy, as they are now of their Mares in Foal, their Cows in Calf,
or Sows when they are ready to farrow, nor offer to beat or kick them (as is
too frequent a Practice) for fear of a Miscarriage.

Many other advantages might be enumerated. For Instance, the Addition of some
thousand Carcasses in our exportation of Barrel'd Beef: The Propagation of
Swines Flesh, and Improvement in the Art of making good Bacon, so much wanted
among us by the great Destruction of Pigs, too frequent at our Tables, which
are no way comparable in Taste, or Magnificence to a well grown, fat Yearly
Child, which roasted whole will make a considerable Figure at a Lord Mayor's
Feast, or any other Public Entertainment. But this, and many others, I omit,
being studious of Brevity.

Supposing that one thousand Families in this City, would be constant Customers
for Infants Flesh, besides others who might have it at merry Meetings,
particularly at Weddings and Christenings, I compute that Dublin would take off
Annually about twenty thousand Carcasses and the rest of the Kingdom (where
probably they will be sold somewhat cheaper) the remaining eighty Thousand.

I can think of no one Objection, that will possibly be raised against this
Proposal, unless it should be urged, that the Number of People will be thereby
much lessened in the Kingdom. This I freely own, and 'twas indeed one principal
Design in offering it to the World. I desire the Reader will observe, that I
calculate my Remedy for this one individual Kingdom of IRELAND, and for no
Other that ever was, is, or, I think, ever can be upon Earth. Therefore let no
Man talk to me of other Expedients: Of taxing our Absentees at five Shillings a
Pound: Of using neither Clothes, nor Household Furniture, except what is of our
own Growth and Manufacture: Of utterly rejecting the Materials and Instruments
that promote Foreign Luxury: Of curing the Expensiveness of Pride, Vanity,
Idleness, and Gameing in our Women: Of introducing a Vein of Parcimony,
Prudence and Temperance: Of learning to love our Country, wherein we differ
even from LAPLANDERS, and the Inhabitants of TOPINAMBOO: Of quitting our
Animosities, and Factions, nor act any longer like the Jews, who were murdering
one another at the very moment their City was taken: Of being a little cautious
not to sell our Country and Consciences for nothing: Of teaching Landlords to
have at least one Degree of Mercy toward their Tenants, Lastly, Of putting a
Spirit of Honesty, Industry, and Skill into our Shopkeepers, who, if a
Resolution, could now be taken to buy only our Native Goods, would immediately
unite to cheat and exact upon us in the Price, the Measure, and the Goodness,
nor could ever yet be brought to make one fair Proposal of just Dealing, though
often and earnestly invited to it.

Therefore I repeat, let no Man talk to me of these and the like Expedients,
'till he has at least some Glimpse of Hope, that there will ever be some
hearty and sincere Attempt to put them in Practice.

But, as to my self, having been wearied out for many Years with offering vain,
idle, visionary Thoughts, and at length utterly desparing of Success, I
fortunately fell upon this Proposal, which, as it is wholly new, so it has
something Solid and Real, of no Expense and little Trouble, full in our own
Power, and whereby we can incur no Danger in disobliging ENGLAND. For this kind
of Commodity will not bear Exportation, the Flesh being of too tender a
Consistence, to admit a long Continuance in Salt, although perhaps I could name
a Country, which would be glad to eat up our whole Nation without it.

After all, I am not so violently bent upon my own Opinion, as to reject any
Offer, proposed by wise Men, which shall be found equally innocent, cheap,
easy, and effectual. But before something of that Kind shall be advanced in
Contradiction to my Scheme, and offering a better, I desire the Author or
Authors, will be pleased maturely to consider two Points. First, As things now
stand, how they will be able to find Food and Raiment for a hundred Thousand
useless Mouths and Backs. And Secondly, There being a round Million of
Creatures in Humane Figure, throughout this Kingdom, whose whole subsistence
put into a common Stock, would leave them in Debt two Millions of Pounds
Sterling, adding those, who are Beggars by Profession, to the Bulk of Farmers,
Cottagers and Laborers, with their Wives and Children, who are Beggars in
effect; I desire those Politicians, who dislike my Overture, and may perhaps be
so bold to attempt an Answer, that they will first ask the Parents of these
Mortals, Whether they would not at this Day think it a great Happiness to have
been sold for Food at a Year old, in the manner I prescribe, and thereby have
avoided such a perpetual Scene of Misfortunes, as they have since gone through,
by the Oppression of Landlords, the Impossibility of paying Rent without Money
or Trade, the Want of common Sustenance, with neither House nor Clothes to
cover them from the Inclemencies of the Weather, and the most inevitable
Prospect of intailing the like, or greater Miseries upon their Breed for ever.

I prosess in the Sincerity of my Heart, that I have not the least Personal
Interest in endeavoring to promote this necessary Work, having no other Motive
than the Public Good of my Country, by advancing our Trade, providing for
Infants, relieving the Poor, and giving some pleasure to the Rich. I have no
Children, by which I can propose to get a single Penny; the youngest being nine
Years Old, and my Wife past Child-boaring.

A VINDICATION OF THE Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, THE Lord CARTERET, From the
CHARGE of favoring Tories, High-Church-Men, and Jacobites.
IN order to treat this important Subject with the greatest Fairness and
Impartiality, perhaps it may be convenient to give some Account of his
Excellency, in whose Life and Character there are certain Particulars which
might suggest a very just Suspicion of some Truth in the Accusation he lies
under.

He is descended from two noble, ancient, and most loyal Families, the
Carterets and the Granvilles, too much distinguished, I confess, for what they
acted, and what they suffered in defending the former Constitution in Church
and State, under King Charles the Martyr; I mean that very Prince, on Account
of whose Martyrdom a Form of Prayer with Fasting was enjoined by Act of
Parliament, to be used on the Thirtieth Day of January every Year, to implore
the Mercies of God, that the Guilt of that sacred and innocent Blood, etc.
might not be visited on us or our Posterity, as we may read at large in our
Common-Prayer-Books, which Day has been solemnly kept, even within the Memory
of many Men now alive.

His Excellency the present Lord, was educated in the University of Oxford;
from thence, with a Singularity scarce to be justified, he carried away more
Greek, Latin, and Philosophy, than properly became a Person of his Rank;
indeed, much more of each, than most of those who are forced to live by their
Learning, will be at the unnecessary Pains to load their Heads with.

This was the Rock he split on upon his first Appearance in the World, just got
clear of his Guardians. For as soon as he came to Town, some Bishops and
Clergymen, and other Persons most eminent for Learning and Parts, got him among
them, from whom, though he were fortunately dragged by a Lady and the Court,
yet he could never wipe off the Stain, nor wash out the Tincture of his
University Acquirements and Disposition.

To this another Missortune was added, That it pleased God to endow him with
great natural Talents, Memory, Judgment, Comprehension, Eloquence, and Wit; and
to finish the Work, all these were fortified, even in his Youth, with the
advantages received by such Employments, as are best fitted, both to exercise
and polish the Gifts of Nature and Education, having been Ambassador in several
Courts, when his Age would hardly allow him to take a Degree, and made
Principal Secretary of State at a Period, when, according to Custom, he ought
to have been busied in losing his Money at a Chocolatehouse, or in other
Amusements, equally laudable and epidemick among Persons of Honor.

I cannot omit another weak Side in his Excellency, for it is known, and can be
proved upon him, that Greek and Latin Books might be found every Day in his
Dressing Room, if it were carefully searched; and there is Reason to suspect,
that some of the said Books have been privately conveyed to him by Tory Hands.
I am likewise assured, that he has been taken in the very Fact of reading the
said Books, even in the midst of a Session, to the great Neglect of public
Affairs.

I own, there may be some Grounds for this Charge, because I have it from good
Hands, that when his Excellency is at Dinner with one or two Scholars at his
Elbows, he grows a most insupportable and unintelligible Companion to all the
sine Gentlemen round the table.

I cannot deny, that his Excellency lies under another great Disadvantage; for
besides all the Accomplishments abovementioned, having that of a most comely
and graceful Person, he has, during the Prime of Youth, Spirits and Vigor, in
a most exemplary Manner led a regular, domestic Life, discovered a great
Esteem, Friendship and Love for his Lady, as well as a true Affection for his
Children: And when he is disposed to admit an entertaining Evening Companion,
he does not always enough reflect whether the Person may possibly in former
Days have lain under the Imputation of a Tory? Nor at such Times do the natural
or affected Fears of Popery and the Pretender make any Part of the
Conversation: I presume, because neither Homer, Plato, Aristotle, nor Cicero,
have made any mention of them.

These I freely acknowledge to be his Excellency's Failings; yet, I think, it
is agreed by Philosophers and Divines, that some Allowance ought to be given to
human Infirmity, and the Prejudices of a wrong Education.

I am well aware how much my Sentiments differ from the orthodox Opinion of one
or two principal Patriots; for these have decided the Matter directly against
me, by declaring, that no Person, who was ever known to lie under the Suspicion
of one single Tory Principle, or who had been once seen at a great Man's Levee
in the worst of Times, should be allowed to come within the Verge of the
Castle; much less to bow in the Antichamber, appear at the Assemblies, or
dance at a Birth-Night. However, I dare assert, that this Maxim has been often
controlled, and that, on the contrary, a considerable Number of early Penitents
have been received into Grace, who are now an Ornament, Happiness, and Support
to the Nation.

Neither do I find any Murmuring on some other Points of greater Importance,
where this favorite Maxim is not so strictly observed.

To instance only in one. I have not heard that any Care has hitherto been
taken to discover whether A famous Rope-dancer.
Madam Violante be a Whig or Tory in her Principles, or even that she has ever
been offered the Oaths to the Governmem t; on the contrary, I am told, that she
openly professes herself to be a High-Flyer; and it is not improbable, but by
her Outlandish Name she may also be a Papist in her Heart. Yet we see this illu
strious and dangerous Female openly caressed by principal Persons of both
Parties, who contribute to support her in a splendid Manner, without the least
Apprehensions from a Grand Jury. And as Hobbs wisely observes, so much Money
being equivalent to so much Power, it may deserve considering with what Safety
such an Instrument of Power ought to be trusted in the Hands of an Alien, who
has not given any legal Security for her good Affection to the Government.

I confess there is one Evil, which I could wish our Friends would think proper
to redress. There are many Whigs in this Kingdom of the oldfashion'd Stamp, of
whom we might make very good Use; they bear the same Loyalty with us. to the
Hanoverian Family, in the Person of King George the Second; the same Abhorrence
of the Pretender, with the Consequents of Popery and Slavery; and the same
Indulgence to tender Consciences; but having nothing to ask for themselves, and
consequently the more Leisure to think for the Public; they are often apt to
entertain Fears and melancholy Prospects concerning the State of their Country,
the Decay of Trade, the Want of Money, the miserable Condition of the People,
with other Topics of like Nature, all which do equally concern both Whig and
Tory, who, if they have any Thing to lose, must be equally Sufferers. Perhaps
one or two of these melanchly Gentlemen will sometimes venture to publish their
Thoughts in Print: Now, I can by no Means approve our usual Custom of cursing
and railing at this Species of Thinkers, under the Names of Tories, Jacobites,
Papists, Libellers, Rebels, and the like.

This was the utter Ruin of that poor, angry, bustling, well-meaning Mortal
Pistorides, who lies equally under the Contempt of both Parties, with no other
Difference than a Mixture of Pity on one Side and of Aversion on the other.

How has he been pelted, pestered and pounded by one single Wag, who promises
never to forsake him living or dead.

I was much pleased with the Humor of a Surgeon in this Town, who, having in
his own Apprehensions received some great Injustice from the Earl of Galloway,
and desparing of Revenge, as well as Relief, declared to all his Friends, that
he had set apart a hundred Guineas to purchase the Earl's Carcass from the
Sexton, whenever I T should die, to make a Skeleton of the Bones, stuff the
Hide, and show them for three Pence; and thus get Vengeance for the Injuries he
had suffered by the owner.

Of the like Spirit too often is that implacable Race of Wits, against whom
there is no Defense but Innocence and Philosophy, neither of which is likely to
be at Hand, and therefore the Wounded have no where to fly for a Cure, but to
downright Stupidity, a crazed Head, or a profligate Contempt of Guilt and Shame.

I am therefore sorry for that other miserable Creature L^d V^t A^n, who spoke
against the Libel in the Privy Council, and likewise in the House of Lords.
Traulus, who although of somewhat a different Species, yet seems very far to
outdo even the Genius of Pistorides in that miscarrying Talent of Railing
without Consistency or Discretion, against the most innocent Persons, according
to the present Situation of his Gall and Spleen. I do not blame an honest
Gentleman for the bitterest Invectives against one to whom he professes the
greatest Friendship, provided he acts in the Dark, so as not to be discovered;
but in the midst of Caresses, Visits, and Invitations, to run into the Streets,
or to as public a Place, and without the least pretended Incitement, sputter
out the basest and falsest Accusations, then to wipe his Mouth, come up smiling
to his Friend, shake him by the Hand, and tell him in a Whisper, it was all for
his Service: This Proceeding I am bold to think a great Failure in Prudence,
and I am afraid lest such a Practitioner, with a Body so open, so foul, and so
full of Sores, may fall under the Resentmen of an incensed political Surgeon,
who is not in much Renown for his Mercy upon great Provocation, who without
waiting for his Death, will flay and dissect him alive, and to the View of
Mankind lay open all the disordered Cells of his Brain, the Vonom of his
Tongue, the Corruption of his Heart, and Spots and Flatuses of his Spleen --
and all this for three Pence.

In such a Case, what a Scene would be laid open? And to drop my Metaphor, what
a Character of our mistaken Friend might an angry Enemy draw and expose?
Particularizing that unnatural Conjunction of Vices and Follies so inconsistent
with each other in the same Breast: Furious and fawning, scurrilous and
flattering, cowardly and provoking, insolent and abject; most profligately
salse, with the strongest Professions of Sincerity; positive and variable,
tyrannical and slavish.

In vain would his Excusers endeavor to palliate his Enormities, by imputing
them to Madness, beause it is well knowm, that Madness only operates by
inflaming and enlarging the good or evil Dispositions of the Mind; for the
Curators of Bedlam assure us, that some Lunaticks are Persons of Honor, Truth,
Benevolence, and many other Virtues, which appear in their highest Ravings,
although after a wild incoherent Manner, while others on the contrary discover
in every Word and action the utmost Baseness and Depravity of human Minds;
which infallibly they possessed in the same Degree, although perhaps under a
better Regulation, before their Entrance into that Academy.

But it may be objected, that there is an Argument of much more Force to excuse
the Overflowings of that zeal which our Friend shows or means for our Cause.
And it must be confessed, that the easy and smooth Fluency of his Elocution
bestowed on him by Nature, and cultivated by continual Practice, added to the
Comelyness of his Person, the Harmony of his Voice, the Gracefulness of his
Manner, and the Decency of his Dress, are Temptations too strong for such a
Genius to resist upon any public Occasion of making them appear with universal
Applause. And if good Men are sometimes accused of loving their Jest better
than their Friend, surely to gain the Reputation of the first Orator in the
Kingdom, no Man of Spirit would scruple to lose all the Friends he had in the
World.

It is usual for Masters to make their Boys declaim on both Sides of an
Argument; and as some kinds of Assemblies are called the Schools of Principles,
I confess nothing can better improve political Schoolboys, than the Art of
making plausible or implausible Harangues against the very Opinion for which
they resolve to determine.

So Cardinal Perron, after having spoke for an Hour to the Admiration of all
his Hearers, to prove the Existence of God, told some of his Intimates, that he
could have spoken another Hour, and much better, to prove the contrary.

To return from this long Digression: If Persons in high Sations have been
allowed to choose Mistresses, without Regard even to Difference in Religion, yet
never incurred the least Reflection on their Loyalty or their Protestantism;
shall the chief Govenour of a great Kingdom be censured for choosing a
Companion, who may formerly have been suspected for differing from the Orthodox
in some speculative Opinions of Persons and Things, which cannot affect the
fundamental Principles of a sound Whig?

But let me suppose a very possible Case. Here is a Person sent to govern
Ireland, whose unfortunate weak Side it happens to be, for several Reasons
abovementioned, that he has encouraged the Attendance of one or two Gentlemen
distinguished for their Taste, their Wit, and their Learning; who have taken
the Oaths to his Majesty, and pray heartily for him; yet, because they may
perhaps be stigmatized as quondam Tories by Pistorides and his Gang, his
Excellency must be forced to banish them under the Pain and Peril of
displeasing the Zealots of his own Party, and thereby, be put into a worse
Condition than every common Goodfellow; who may be a sincere Protestant, and a
loyal Subject; and yet rather choose to drink fine Ale at the Pope's Head, than
muddy at the King's.

Let me then return to my Supposition. It is certain, the High-flown Loyalists
in the present Sense of the Word, have their Thoughts, and Studies, and
Tongues, so entirely diverted by political Schemes, that the Zeal of their
Principles has eaten up their Understandings; neither have they Time from
their Employments, their Hopes, and their hourly Labors, for acquiring new
Additions of Merit; to amuse themselves with philological Converse, or
Speculations which are utterly ruinous to all Schemes of rising in the World:
What must then a Great Man do, whose ill Stars have fatally perverted him to a
Love, and Taste, and Possession of Literature, Politeness and good Sense? Our
thorough-sped Republic of Whigs, which contains the Bulk of all Hopers,
Pretenders, Expectors and Possessors, are, beyond all Doubt, most highly useful
to Princes, to Governors, to great Ministers, and to their Country; but at the
same Time, and by necessary Consequence, the most disagreable Companions to all
who have that unfortunate Turn of Mind peculiar to his Excellency, and perhaps
to five or six more in a Nation.

I do not deny it possible, that an Original or Proselyte Favourer of the Times
might have been born to these useless Talents, which in former Ages qualified a
Man to be a Poet, or a Philosopher. All I contend for is, that where the true
Genius of Party once enters, it sweeps the House clean, and leaves Room for
many other Spirits, to take joint Possession 'till the last State of that Man
is exceedingly better than the first.

I allow it a great Error in his Excellency, that he adheres so obstinately to
his old unfashionable academick Education: Yet so perverse is human Nature,
that the usual Remedies for this Evil in others, have produced a contrary
Effect in him; to a Degree that I am credibly informed, he will, as I have
already hinted, in the Middle of a Session, quote Passages out of Plato and
Pindar at his own Table to some Book-learn'd Companion without Blushing, even
when Persons of great Stations are by.

I will venture one Step farther, which is, freely to confess, that this
mistaken Method of educating Youth in the Knowledge of ancient Learning and
Language, is too apt to spoil their Politics and Principles? because, the
Doctrine and Examples of the Books they read, teach them Lessons directly
contrary in every Point to the present Practice of the World: And accordingly,
Hobbes most judiciously observes, that the Writings of the Greeks and Romans
made young Men imbibe Opinions against absolute Power in a Prince, or even in a
first Minister, and to embrace Notions of Liberty and Property.

It has been therefore a great Felicity to these Kingdoms, that the Heirs to
Titles and large Estates have a Weakness in their Eyes, and a Tenderness in
their Constitutions, are not able to bear the Pain and Indignity of Whipping,
and, as the Mother rightly expresses it, could never take to their Books; yet
are well enough qualified to sign a Receipt for half a Year's Rent, to put
their Name (rightly spelt) to a Warrant, and to read Pamphlets against Religion
and High-Flying; whereby they fill their Niches, and carry themselves through
the World with that Dignity which best becomes a Senator, and a Squire.

I could heartily wish his Excellency would be more condescending to the Genius
of the Kingdom he Governs, to the Condition of the Times, and to the Nature of
the Station he sills. Yet if it be true, what I have read in old English
Story-Books, that one Agesilaus (no Matter to the Bulk of my Readers whether I
spell the Name right or wrong) was caught by the Parson of the Parish, riding
on a Hobbyhorse with his Children; that Socrates a Heathen Philosopher was
found dancing by himself at Fourscore; that a King called Caesar Augustus (or
some such Name) used to play with Boys, whereof some might possibly be Sons of
Tories; and two great Men called Scipio and Laelius (I forget their Christian
Names, and whether they were Poets or Generals,) often played at Duck and Drake
with smooth Stones on a River: Now, I say, if these Facts be true, (and the
Book where I found them is in Print) I cannot imagine why our most zealous
Patriots may not a little indulge his Excellency, in an Infirmity which is not
mortally Evil, provided he gives no public Scandal (which is by all Means to
be avoided:) I say, why he may not be indulged twice a Week to converse with
one or two particular Persons, and let him and them conn over their old
exploded Readings together, after Mornings spent in hearing and prescribing
Ways and Means from and to his most obedient Politicians for the Welfare of the
Kingdom; although the said particular Person or Persons may not have made so
public a Declaration of their political Faith in all its Parts, as the
Business of the Nation requires; still submitting my Opinion to that happy
Majority, which I am confident is always in the right; by whom the Liberty of
the Subject has been so frequently, so strenuously, and so successfully
asserted; who by their wise Councils have made Commerce to flourish, Money to
abound, Inhabitants to increase, the Value of Lands and Rents to rise, and the
whole Island put on a new Face of Plenty and Prosperity.

But in order to clear his Excellency more fully from this Accusation of
showing his Favors to High-flyers, Tories and Jacobites, it will be necessary
to come to Particulars.

The first Person of a Tory Denomination, to whom his Excellency gave any Marks
of his Favor, was Doctor Thomas Sheridan. It is to be observed, that this
happened so early in his Exellency's Government, as it may be justly supposed
he had not been informed of that Gentleman's Character upon so dangerous an
Article. The Doctor being well known and distinguished for his Skill and
Success in the Education of Youth, beyond most of his Profession for many Years
past; was recommended to his Excellency on the Score of his Learning, and
particularly for his Knowledge in the Greek Tongue, whereof it seems his
Excellency is a great Admirer, although for what Reasons I could never imagine.
However it is agreed on all Hands, that his Lordship was too easily prevailed
on by the Doctor's Request, or indeed rather from the Biass of his own Nature,
to hear a Tragedy acted in that unknown Language by the Doctor's Lads, which
was written by some Heathen Author; but whether it contained any Tory or
High-Church Principles, must be left to the Consciences of the Boys, the
Doctor, and his Excellency; the only Witnesses in this Case whose Testimonies
can be depended upon.

It seems, his Excellency (a Thing never to be sufficiently wondered at) was so
pleased with his entertainment, that some Time after he gave the Doctor a
Church Living, to the Value almost of one Hundred Pounds a Year, and made him
one of his Chaplains, from an antiquated Notion, that good Schoolmasters ought
to be encouraged in every Nation professing Civility and Religion. Yet his
Excellency did not venture to make this bold Step without strong
Recommendations from Persons of undoubted Principles fitted to the Times; who
thought themselves bound in Justice, Honor and Gratitude, to do the Doctor a
good Office in Return for the Care he had taken of their Children, or those of
their Friends. Yet the Catastrophe was terrible; for the Doctor in the Height
of his Felicity and Gratitude, going down to take Possession of his Parish, and
furnished with a few led Sermons, whereof, as it is to be supposed, the Number
was very small, having never served a Cure in the Church; he stopped at Cork to
attend on his Bishop, and going to Church on the Sunday following, was,
according to the usual Civility of Country Clergymen, invited by the Minister
of the Parish to supply the Pulpit. It happened to be the first of August; and
the first of August happened that Year to light upon a Sunday: And it happened,
that the Doctor's Text was in these Words; Sufficient unto the Day is the Evil
thereof. And lastly, it happened, that some one Person of the Congregation,
whose Loyalty made him watchful upon every Appearance of Danger to his
Majesty's Person and Government, when Service was over, gave the Alarm. Notice
was immediately sent up to Town, and by the Zeal of one Man, of no large
Dimensions of Body or Mind, such a clamor was raised, that we in Dublin could
apprehend no less than an Invasion by the Pretender, who must be landed in the
South. The Result was, that the Doctor must be struck out of the Chaplains
List, and appear no more at the Castle. Yet, whether he were then, or be at
this Day a Whig or a Tory, I think is a Secret; only it is manifest, that he is
a zealous Hanoverian, at least in Poetry, and a great Adorer of the present
Royal Family through all its Branches; his Friends likewise assert, that he had
preached this same Sermon often, under the same Text; that not having observed
the Words 'till he was in the Pulpit, and had opened his Notes, as he is a
Person a little abstracted, he wanted Presence of Mind to change them: And that
in the whole Sermon there was not a Syllable relating to Government or Party,
or to the Subject of the Day.

In this Incident there seems to have been an Union of Events that will
probably never happen again to the End of the World, or at least, like the
grand Conjunction in the Heavens, which, I think, they say can arrive but once
in twenty Thousand Years.

The second Gentleman (if I am right in my Chronology) who under the Suspicion
of a Tory received some Favor from his Excellency, is Mr. James Stopford, very
strongly recommended by the most eminent Whig in England, on the Account of his
Learning and Virtue, and other Accomplishments: He had passed the greatest Part
of his Youth in close Study, or in traveling; and was either not at Home or
not at Leisure to trouble his Thoughts about Party, which I allow to be a great
Omission; though I cannot honestly place him in the List of Tories, and therefore
think his Excellency may be fairly acquitted for making him Vicar of Finglass,
worth about one Hundred and fifty Pounds a Year.

The third is Doctor Patrick Delany; this Divine lies under some Disadvantage,
having in his Youth received many Civilities from a certain Person Sir
Constantine Phipps, Lord Chancellor of Ireland when Queen Anne died.
then in a very high Station here, for which Reason I doubt the Doctor never
drunk his Confusion since; and what makes the Matter desperate, it is now too
late; unless our Inquisitors will be content with drinking Confusion to his
Memory. The aforesaid eminent Person who was a Judge of all Merit but Party,
distinguished the Doctor among other Juniors in our University, for his
Learning, Virtue, Discretion, and good Sense; but the Doctor was then in too
good a Situation at his College to hope or endeavor at a better Establishment
from one who had no Power to give it him.

Upon the present Lord Lieutenant's coming over, the Doctor was named to his
Exdellency by a Friend, among other Clergymen of Distinction, as Persons whose
Characters it was proper his Excellency should know: And by the Truth of which
the Giver would be content to stand or fall in his Excellency's Opinion; since
not one of those Persons were in particular Friendship with the Gentlemen who
gave in their Names: By this and some other Incidents, particularly the
Recommendation of the late Archbishop of Dublin, the Doctor became known to his
Excellency, whose fatal Turn of Mind toward heathenish and outlandish Books
and Languages, finding, as I conceive, a like Disposition in the Doctor, was
the Cause of his becoming so domestic as we are told he is, at the Castle of
Dublin.

Three or four Years ago, the Doctor, grown weary of an Academick Life, for
some Reasons best known to the Managers of the Discipline in that learned
Society (which it may not be for their Honor to mention) resolved to leave it,
although by the Benefit of his Pupils, and his Senior-fellowship with all its
Perquisites, he received every Year between nine Hundred and a Thousand Pounds.
And a small Northern Living, in the University's Donation, of somewhat better
than a hundred Pounds a Year, falling at the same Time with the Chancellorship
of Christ-Church to about equal Value, in the Gist of his Excellency, the
Doctor ventured into the World in a very scanty Condition, having squandered
away all his annual Income in a manner, which although perhaps proper enough
for a Clergyman without a Family, will not be for the Advantage of his
Character to discover either on the Exchange, or at a Banker's Shop.

About two Months ago, his Excellency gave the Doctor a Prebend in St.
Patrick's Cathedral, which being of near the same Value with either of the two
former will add a third Part to his Revenues, after he shall have paid the
great Encumbrances upon it; so that he may now be said to possess of Church
Preserments, in scattered Tithes, three hundred Pounds a Year, instead of the
like Sum of infallible Rents from a senior Fellowship with the Offices annexed;
besides the Advantage of a free Lodging, and some other Easements. But since
the Doctor has not in any of his Writings, his Sermons, his Actions, his
Discourse, or his Company, discovered one single Principle of either Whig or
Tory; and that the Lord Lieutenant still continues to admit him, I shall boldly
pronounce him one of us; but like a new Free-Mason, who has not yet learned
all the Dialect of the Mystery. Neither can he justly be accused of any Tory
Doctrines, except perhaps some among those few, with which that wicked Party
was charged during the Height of their Power, but have been since transferred
for the most solid Reasons to the whole Body of our firmest Friends. I have now
done with the Clergy, and upon the strictest Examination, have not been able to
find above one of that Order, against whom any Party Suspicion can lie, which
is the unfortunate Gentleman Dr. Sheridan, who by mere Chance-medly shot his
own Fortune dead with a single Text.

As to the Laity, I can hear of but one Person of the Tory Stamp, who since the
Beginning of his Excellency's Government, did ever receive any solid Mark of
his Favor, I mean Sir Arthur Acheson, reported to be an acknowledged Tory,
and, what is almost as bad, a Scholar into the Bargain. It is whispered about
as a certain Truth, that this Gentleman is to have a Grant of a certain Barrack
upon his Estate within two Miles of his own House, for which the Crown is to be
his Tenant, at the Rent of sixty Pounds per Annum; he being only at the Expense
of about five hundred Pounds, to put the House in Repair, build Stables, and
other Necessaries. I will place this invidious Mark of Beneficence, conferred
on a Tory in a fair Light, by computing the Costs and necessary Defalcations;
after which it may be seen how much Sir Arthur will be annually a clear Gainer
by the Public, notwithstanding his unfortunate Principles, and his Knowledge
in Greek and Latin.

l. s. d. For Repairs. etc. 500 l. the Interest whereof, per Ann. 30 0 0 For
all Manner of Poultry to furnish the Troopers, but which the said Troopers must
be at the Labor of catching, valued per Ann. 5 0 0 For straggling Sheep. 8 0 0
For Game destroyed five miles round 6 0 0 49 0 0 Rent paid to Sir Arthur 60 0 0
Deduct 49 0 0 Remains clear 11 0 0

Thus, if Sir Arthur Acheson shall have the good Fortune to obtain a Grant of
this Barrack, he will receive neat Profit annually from the Crown Eleven Pounds
Sterling, to help him in entertaining the Officers, and making Provision for
his younger Children.

It is true, there is another Advantage to be expected, which may fully
compensate the Loss of Cattle and Poultry; by multiplying the Breed of Mankind;
and particularly of good Protestants in a Part of the Kingdom half depopulated
by the wild Humor among the Farmers thereof leaving their Country. But I am
not so skilful in Arithmetic, as to compute the Value.

I have reckoned one per Cent. below the legal Interest for the Money that Sir
Arthur must expend: And valued the Damage in the other Articles very
moderately. However, I am confident he may with good Management be a Saver at
least: which is a prodigious Instance of Moderation in our Friends toward a
professed Tory, whatever Merit he may pretend by the Unwillingness he has
shown to make his Excellency uneasy in his Administration.

Thus I have with the utmost Impartiality collected every single Favor,
(further than personal Civilities) conferred by his Excellency on Tories, and
reputed Tories, since his first Arrival hither, to this present 13th Day of
April, in the Year of our Lord 1730, giving all Allowance possible to the
Arguments on the other Side of the Question.

And the Account will stand thus. Disposed of Preferments and Employments to
Tories, or reputed Tories, by his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant in about the
Space of six Years, To Doctor Thomas Sheridan in a Rectory near Kinsale, per
Ann. 100 0 0 To Sir Arthur Acheson, Baronet, a Barrack, per Ann. 11 0 0 111 0 0

Give me Leave now to compute in Gross the Value of the Favors done by his
Excellency to the true Friends of their King and Country, and of the Protestant
Religion.

It is to be remembered, that although his Excellency cannot be properly said
to bestow Bishoprics, Commands in the Army, the Place of a Judge, or
Commissioner in the Revenue, and some others; yet they are, for the most Part,
disposed upon his Recommendation, except where the Persons are immediately sent
from England by their Interest at Court, for which I have allowed large
Defalcations in the following Accounts. And it is remarkable that the only
considerable Station conferred on a reputed Tory since his present Excellency's
Government was of this latter Kind.

And indeed it is but too remarkable, that in a neighboring Nation (where that
dangerous Denomination of Men is incomparably more numerous, more powerful, and
of Consequence more formidable) real Tories can often with much less Difficulty
obtain very high Favors from the Government, than their reputed Brethren can
arrive to the lowest in ours. I observe this with all possible Submission to
the Wisdom of their Policy, which, however, will not, I believe, dispute the
Praise of Vigilance with ours.

WHIG Account.
To Persons promoted to Bishoprics, or removed to more beneficial Ones,
computed per Ann. 10050 0 0 To Civil Employments 9030 0 0 To Military Commands
8436 0 0 27516 0 0 TORY Account.
To Tories 111 0 0 Balance 27405 0 0

I shall conclude with this Observation, that, as I think, the Tories have
sufficient Reason to be fully satisfied with the Share of Trust, and Power, and
Employments which they possess under the Lenity of the present Government; so, I
do not find how his Excellency can be justly censured for favoring none but
High-Church, High-flyers, Termagants, Laudists, Sacheverellians,
Tip-top-gallon-men, Jacobites, Tantivyes, Anti-Hannoverians, Friends to Popery
and the Pretender, and to Arbitrary Power, Disobligers of England, Breakers of
DEPENDENCY, Inflamers of Quarrels between the two Nations, Public
Incendiaries, Enemies to the King and Kingdoms, Haters of TRUE Protestants,
Lawrel-men, Annists, Complainers of the Nation's Poverty, Ormondians,
Iconoclasts, Anti-Glorious-Memorists, White-rosalists, Tenth-a-Junians, and the
like: When by a fair State of the Account, the Balance, I conceive, plainly
lies on the other Side.

AN ESSAY ON THE Fates of CLERGYMEN.
THere is no Talent so useful toward rising in the World, or which puts Men
more out of the Reach of Fortune, than that Quality generally possessed by the
dullest Sort of People, and is in common Speech called Discretion, a Species of
lower Prudence, by the Assistance of which, People of the meanest
Intellectuals, without any other Qualification, pass through the World in great
Tranquillity, and with universal good Treatment, neither giving nor taking
Offense. Courts are seldom unprovided of Persons under this Character, on whom,
if they happen to be of great Quality, most Employments, even the Greatest
naturally fall, when Competitors will not agree; and in such Promotions, no
Body rejoices or grieves. The Truth of this I could prove by several Instances,
within my own Memory (for I say nothing of the present Times.)

And indeed, as Regularity and Forms are of great Use in carrying on the
Business of the World, so it is very convenient, that Persons endued with this
Kind of Discretion, should have that Share which is proper to their Talents in
the Conduct of Affairs, but by no means to meddle in Matters which require
Genius, Learning, strong Comprehension, Quickness of Conception, Magnanimity,
Generosity, Sagacity, or any other superior Gift of human Minds. Because this
sort of Discretion, is usually attended with a strong Desire of Money, and few
Scruples about the Way of obtaining it, with servile Flattery and Submission,
with a Want of all public Spirit or Principle, with a perpetual wrong Judgment
when the Owners come into Power and high Place, how to dispose of Favor and
Preferment; having no Measure for Merit and Virtue in others, but those very
Steps by which themselves ascended; nor the least Intention of doing Good or
Hurt to the Public, farther than either one or the other, is likely to be
subservient to their own Security or Interest. Thus being void of all
Friendship and Enmity, they never complain nor find Fault with the Times, and
indeed never have Reason to do so.

Men of eminent Parts and Abilities, as well as Virtues, do sometimes rise in
the Courts, sometimes in the Law, and sometimes, even in the Church. Such were
the Lord Bacon, the Earl of Strafford, Archbishop Laud in the Reign of King
Charles I. and others in our own Times, whom I shall not name; but these, and
many more, under different Princes, and in different Kingdoms, were Disgraced
or Banished or suffered Death, merely in Envy to their Virtues and superior
Genius, which emboldened them in great Exigencies and Distresses of State
(wanting a reasonable Infusion of this Aldermanly Discretion) to attempt the
Service of their Prince and Country out of the common Forms.

This evil Fortune, which generally attends extraordinary Men in the Management
of great Affairs, has been imputed to diverse Causes, that need not be here set
down, when so obvious an One occurs; if what a certain Writer observes, be
true, that when a great Genius appears in the World, the Dunces are all in
Confederacy against him. And thus although he employs his Talents wholly in his
Closet, without interfering with any Man's Ambition or Avarice; what must he
expect when he ventures out to seek for Preferment in a Court, but universal
Opposition when he is mounting the Ladder, and every Hand ready to turn him
off, when he is at the Top? And in this Point Fortune generally acts directly
contrary to Nature; for in Nature we find, that Bodies full of Life and Spirits
mount easily, and are hard to fall, whereas heavy Bodies are hard to rise, and
come down with greater Velocity, in Proportion to their Weight; but we find
Fortune every day acting just the Reverse of this.

This Talent of Discretion, as I have described it in its several Adjuncts and
Circumstances, is no where so serviceable as to the Clergy, to whose Preserment
nothing is so fatal as the Character of Wit, Politeness in Reading, or Manners,
or that Kind of Behavior which we contract by having too much conversed with
Persons of high Stations and Eminency; these Qualifications being reckoned by
the Vulgar of all Ranks, to be Marks of Levity, which is the last Crime the
World will pardon in a Clergyman: To this I may add a free Manner of Speaking
in mixed Company, and too frequent an Appearance in Places of much Resort, which
are equally noxious, to spiritual Promotions.

I have known indeed a few Exceptions to some Parts of these Regulations. I
have seen some of the dullest Men alive aiming at Wit, and others with as
little Pretensions affecting Politeness in Manners and Discourse; but never
being able to persuade the World of their Guilt, they grew into considerable
Stations, upon the firm Assurance which all People had of their Discretion,
because they were a Size too low to deceive the World to their own
Disadvantage. But this I confess is a Trial too dangerous often to engage in.

There is a known Story of a Clergyman, who was recommended for a Preferment by
some great Men at Court, to an Archbishop. His Grace, said he had heard that
the Clergyman used to play at Whisk and Swobbers; that as to playing now and
then a sober Game at Whisk for Pastime, it might be pardoned, but he could not
digest those wicked Swobbers, and it was with some Pains that my Lord S^rs
could undeceive him. I ask, by what Talents we may suppose that great Prelate
ascend so high, or what sort of Qualifications he would expect in those whom he
took into his Patronage, or would probably recommend to Court for the
Government of Distant Churches.

Two Clergymen in my Memory stood Candidates for a small Free School in ^Shire,
where a Gentleman of Quality and Interest in the Country, who happened to have
a better Understanding than his Neighbors, procured the Place for him who was
the better Scholar, and more gentlemanly Person of the two, very much to the
Regret of all the Parish; the other being disappointed came up to London, where
he became the greatest Pattern of this lower Discretion that I have known, and
possessed with as heavy Intellectuals; which together with the Coldness of his
Temper, and Gravity of his Deportment, carried him safe through many
Difficulties, and he lived and died in a great Station, while his Competitor is
too obscure for Fame to tell us what become of him.

This Species of Discretion, which I so much celebrate, and do most heartily
recommend, has one Advantage not yet mentioned, that it will carry a Man safe
through all the Malice and Variety of Parties, so far, that whatever Faction
happens to be uppermost, his Claim is usually allowed for a Share of what is
going. And the Thing seems to me highly reasonable: For in all great Changes,
the prevailing Side is usually so tempestuous, that it wants the Ballast of
those, whom the World calls Moderate Men, and I call Men of Discretion, whom
People in Power may with little Ceremony load as heavy as they please, drive
them through the hardest and deepest Roads without Danger of found'ring, or
breaking their Backs, and will be sure to find them neither rusty nor vicious.

I will here give the Reader a short History of two Clergymen in England, the
Characters of each, and the Progress of their Fortunes in the World; by which
the Force of worldly Discretion, and the bad Consequences from the Want of that
Virtue will strongly appear.

Corusodes, an Oxford Student, and a Farmer's Son, was never absent from
Prayers or Lecture, nor once out of his College after Tom had tolled. He spent
every Day ten Hours in his Closet, in reading his Courses, Dozing, clipping
Papers, or darning his Stockings, which last he performed to Admiration. He
could be soberly drunk at the Expense of others, with College Ale, and at those
Seasons was always most devout. He wore the same Gown five Years, without
dragling or tearing. He never once looked into a Play-book or a Poem. He read
Virgil and Ramus in the same Cadence, but with a very different Taste. He never
understood a Jest, or had the least Conception of Wit.

For one Saying he stands in Renown to this Day. Being with some other Students
over a Pot of Ale, one of the Company said so many pleasant Things, that the
rest were much diverted, only Corusodes was silent and unmoved. When they
parted, he called this merry Companion aside, and said, Sir, I preceive by your
often speaking, and our Friends Laughing, that you spoke many Jests, and you
could not but observe my Silence. But, Sir, this is my Humor, I never make a
Jest myself, nor ever laugh at another Man's.

Corusodes thus endowed got into Holy Orders, having by the most extreme
Parsimony saved thirty four Pounds out of a very beggarly Fellowship, went up
to London, where his Sister was waiting Woman to a Lady, and so good a
Solicitor, that by her Means he was admitted to read Prayers in the Family
twice a Day, at fourteen Shillings a Month. He had now acquired a low,
obsequious, awkward Bow, and a Talent of gross Flattery, both in and out of
Season; he would shake the Butler by the Hand; he taught the Page his
Catechism, and was sometimes admitted to dine at the Steward's Table. In short,
he got the good Word of the whole Family, and was recommended by my Lady for
Chaplain to some other Noble House, by which his Revenue (beside Vales)
amounted to about thirty Pounds a Year; his Sister procured him a Scarf from my
Lord (who had a small Design of Gallantry upon her;) and by his Lordship's
Solicitation he got a Lectureship in Town of sixty Pounds a Year; where he
preached constantly in Person, in a grave Manner, with an audible Voice, a
Style Ecclesiastic, and the Matter (such as it was) well suited to the
Intellectuals of his Hearers. Some time after a Country Living fell in my
Lord's Disposal, and his Lordship, who had now some Encouragement given him of
Success in his Amor, bestowed the Living on Corusodes, who still kept his
Lectureship and Residence in Town, where he was a constant Attendant at all
Meetings relating to Charity, without ever contributing further than his
frequent pious Exhortations. If any Women of better Fashion in the Parish
happened to be absent from Church, they were sure of a Visit from him in a Day
or two, to chide and to dine with them.

He had a select Number of Poor, constantly attending at the Street Door of his
Lodgings, for whom he was a common Solicitor to his former Patroness, dropping
in his own Half-Crown among the Collections, and taking it out when he disposed
of the Money. At a Person of Quality's House, he would never sit down 'till he
was thrice bid, and then upon the Corner of the most distant Chair. His whole
Demeanor was formal and starched, which adhered so close, that he could never
Shake it off in his highest Promotion.

His Lord was now in high Employment at Court, and attended by him with the
most abject Assiduity, and his Sister being gone off with Child to a private
Lodging, my Lord continued his Graces to Corusodes, got him to be a Chaplain in
Ordinary, and in due Time a Parish in Town, and a Dignity in the Church.

He paid his Curates punctually, at the lowest Sallary, and partly out of the
Communion-Money; but gave them good Advice in Abundance. He married a Citizen's
Widow, who taught him to put out small Sums at Ten per Cent. and brought him
acquainted with Jobbers in Change-Alley. By her Dexterity, he sold the
Clarkship of his Parish, when it became vacant.

He kept a miserable House, but the Blame was laid wholly upon Madam; for the
good Doctor was always at his Books, or visiting the Sick, or doing other
Offices of Charity and Piety in his Parish.

He treated all his Inferiors of the Clergy with a most sanctified Pride; was
rigorously and universally censorious upon all his Brethren of the Gown, on
their first Appearance in the World, or while they continued meanly preferred;
but gave large Allowance to the Laiety of high Rank, or great Riches, using
neither Eyes nor Ears for their Faults: He was never sensible of the least
Corruption in Courts, Parliaments or Ministries, but made the most favorable
Constructions of all public Proceedings; and Power, in whatever Hands, or
whatever Party, was always secure of his most charitable Opinion. He had many
wholesome Maxims ready to excuse all Miscarriages of State; Men are but Men;
Erunt vitia donee homines; and Quod supra nos, nil ad nos; with several others
of equal Weight.

It would lengthen my Paper beyond Measure to trace out the whole System of his
Conduct; his dreadful Apprehensions of Popery; his great Moderation toward
Dissenters of all Denominations; with hearty Wishes, that by yielding somewhat
on both Sides, there might be a general Union among Protestants; his short,
inoffensive Sermons in his Turns at Court, and the Matter exactly suited to the
present Juncture of prevailing Opinions. The Arts he used to obtain a Mitre, by
writing against Episcopacy, and the Proofs he gave of his Loyalty, by
palliating or defending the Murder of a martyred Prince.

Endowed with all these Accomplishments, we leave him in the full Career of
Success, mounting fast toward the Top of the Ladder Ecclesiastical, which he
has a fair Probability to reach, without the Merit of one single Virtue,
moderately stocked with the least valuable Parts of Erudition, utterly devoid
of all Taste, Judgment, or Genius, and in his Grandeur naturally choosing to
hawl up others after him, whose Accomplishments most resemble his own, except
his beloved Sons, Nephews, or other Kindred, be not in Competition; or lastly,
except his Inclinations be diverted by those who have Power to mortify or
further advance him.

Eugenio set out from the same University, and about the same Time with
Corusodes; he had the Reputation of an arch Lad at School, and was
unfortunately possessed with a Talent for Poetry, on which Account he received
many chiding Letters from his Father, and grave Advice from his Tutor. He did
not neglect his College Learning, but his chief Study was the Authors of
Antiquity, with a perfect Knowledge in the Greek and Roman Tongues. He could
never procure himself to be chosen Fellow; for it was objected against him,
that he had written Verses, and particularly some, wherein he glanced at a
certain Reverend Doctor, famous for Dullness; That he had been seen bowing to
Ladies as he met them in the Streets; and it was proved, that once he had been
found dancing in a private Family with half a dozen of both Sexes.

He was the younger Son to a Gentleman of a good Birth, but small Fortune, and
his Father dying, he was driven to London, to seek his Fortune: He got into
Orders, and became Reader in a Parish Church at twenty Pounds a Year, was
carried by an Oxford Friend to Will's Coffee-House, frequented in those Days by
Men of Wit, where, in some Time, he had the bad Luck to be distinguished. His
scanty Sallery compelled him to run deep in Debt for a new Gown and Cassock,
and now and then forced him to write some Paper of Wit or Humor, or preach a
Sermon for ten Shillings, to supply his Necessities. He was a thousand Times
recommended by his Poetical Friends to great Persons, as a young Man of
excellent Parts, who deserved Encouragement, and received a thousand Promises;
but his Modesty, and a generous Spirit, which disdained the Slavery of
continual Application and Attendance, always disappointed him, making room for
vigilant Dunces, who were sure to be never out of Sight.

He had an excellent Faculty in preaching, if he were not sometimes a little
too refined, and apt to trust too much to his own Way of thinking and reasoning.

When upon the Vacancy of Preferment he was hardly drawn to attend upon some
promising Lord, he received the usual Answer, that he came too late, for it had
been given to another the very Day before. And he had only this Comfort left,
that every Body said, it was a thousand Pities, something could not be done for
poor Mr. Eugenio.

The Remainder of his Story will be dispatched in a few Words: Wearied with
weak Hopes, and weaker Pursuits, he accepted a Curacy in Derbyshire, of thirty
Pounds a Year, and when he was five and forty, had the great Felicity to be
prefered by a Friend of his Father's, to a Vicaridge worth annually sixty
Pound, in the most desert Parts of Lincolnshire, where, his Spirit quite sunk
with those Reflections that Solitude and Disappointments bring, he married a
Farmer's Widow, and is still alive, utterly undistinguished and forgotten, only
some of the Neighbors have accidentally heard, that he had been a notable Man
in his Youth.

AN ESSAY ON Modern Education.
FROM frequently reflecting upon the Course and Method of educating Youth in
this and a neighboring Kingdom, with the general Success and Consequence
thereof, I am come to this Determination, That Education is always the worse in
Proportion to the Wealth and Grandeur of the Parents; nor do I doubt in the
least, that if the whole World were now under the Dominion of one Monarch
(provided I might be allowed to choose where he should fix the Seat of his
Empire) the only Son and Heir of that Monarch, would be the worst educated
Mortal, that ever was born since the Creation; and I doubt, the same Proportion
will hold through all Degrees and Titles, from an Emperor downwards, to the
common Gentry.

I do not say, that this has been always the Case; for in better Times it was
directly otherwise, and a Scholar may fill half his Greek and Roman Shelves
with Authors of the noblest Birth, as well as highest Virtue: Nor, do I tax all
Nations at present with this Defect, for I know there are some to be excepted,
and particularly Scotland, under all the Disadvantages of its Climate and Soil,
if that Happiness be not rather owing even to those very Disadvantages. What is
then to be done, if this Reflection must fix on two Countries, which will be
most ready to take Offense, and which of all others it will be least prudent or
safe to offend?

But there is one Circumstance yet more dangerous and lamentable: For if,
according to the Postulatum already laid down, the highest Quality any Youth is
of, he is in greater Likelihood to be worse educated; it behooves me to dread,
and keep far from the Verge of Scandalum Magnatum.

Retracting therefore that hazardous Postulatum, I shall venture no further at
present than to say, that perhaps some additional Care in educating the Sons of
Nobility and principal Gentry, might not be ill employed. If this be not
delivered with Softness enough, I must for the future be silent.

In the mean Time, let me ask only two Questions, which relate to England. I
ask first, how it comes about, that for above sixty Years past, the chief
Conduct of Affairs has been generally placed in the Hands of New-men, with
very few Exceptions? The Noblest Blood of England having been shed in the grand
Rebellion, many great Families became extinct, or supported only by Minors.
When the King was restored, very few of those Lords remained, who began, or at
least had improved their Education, under the happy Reign of King James, or
King Charles I. of which Lords the two principal were the Marquis of Ormond,
and the Earl of Southampton. The Minors have, or had, during the Rebellion and
Usurpation, either received too much Tincture of bad Principles from those
fanatic Times, or coming to Age at the Restoration, fell into the Vices of
that dissolute Reign.

I date from this Era, the corrupt Method of Education among us, and the
Consequence thereof, in the Necessity the Crown lay under of introducing
New-men into the chief Conduct of public Affairs, or to the Office of what we
now call Prime Ministers, Men of Art, Knowledge, Application and Insinuation,
merely for Want of a Supply among the Nobility. They were generally (though not
always) of good Birth, sometimes younger Brothers, at other Times such, who,
although inheriting good Estates, yet happened to be well educated, and
provided with Learning; such under that King, were Hyde, Bridgeman, Clifford,
Osborn, Godolphin, Ashley-Cooper: Few or none under the short Reign of King
James II. Under King William; Summers, Mountague, Churchil, Vernon, Boil, and
many others: Under the Queen; Harley, St. John, Harcourt, Trevor, who indeed
were Persons of the best private Families, but unadorned with Titles. So in the
following Reign, Mr. Robert Walpole, was for many Years Prime Minister, in
which Post he still happily continues: His Brother Horace is Ambassador
Extraordinary to France. Mr. Addison and Mr. Craggs, without the least
Allowance to support them, have been Secretaries of State.

If the Facts have been thus for above sixty Years past (whereof I could with a
little further Recollection produce many more Instances) I would ask again, how
it has happened, that in a Nation plentifully abounding with Nobility, so
great Share in the most competent Parts of public Management, has been for so
long a Period chiefly entrusted to Commoners, unless some Omissions or Defects
of the highest Import, may be charged upon those, to whom the Care of educating
our Noble Youth had been committed? For, if there be any Difference between
human Creatures in the Point of natural Parts, as we usually call them, it
should seem, that the Advantage lies on the Side of Children, born from noble
and wealthy Parents; the same traditional Sloth and Luxury which render their
Body weak and effeminate, perhaps refining and giving a freer Motion to the
Spirits, beyond what can be expected from the gross, robust Issue of meaner
Mortals. Add to this, the peculiar Advantages, which all young Noblemen
possess, by the Privileges of their Birth. Such as a free Access to Courts, and
a universal deference paid to their Persons.

But as my Lord Bacon charge it for a Fault on Princes, that they are
impatient to compass Ends, without giving themselves the Trouble of consulting
or executing the Means: So, perhaps, it may be the Disposition of young Nobles,
either from the Indulgence of Parents, Tutors and Governors, or their own
Inactivity, that they expect the Accomplishments of a good Education, without
the least Expense of Time or Study, to acquire them.

What I said last, I am ready to retract; for the Case is infinitely worse; and
the very Maxims set up to direct modern Education, are enough to destroy all
the Seeds of Knowledge, Honor, Wisdom and Virtue among us. The current Opinion
prevails, that the Study of Greek and Latin is Loss of Time; that public
Schools, by mingling the Sons of Noblemen with those of the Vulgar, engage the
former in bad Company; that Whipping breaks the Spirits of Lads well born; that
Universities make young Men Pedants; that to dance, fence, speak French, and
know how to behave yourself among great Persons of both Sexes, comprehends the
whole Duty of a Gentleman.

I cannot but think this wise System of Education, has been much cultivated
among us by those Worthies of the Army, who during the last War, returning from
Flanders at the Close of each Campaign, became the Dictators of Behavior,
Dress, and Politeness, to all those Youngsters, who frequent
Chocolate-Coffee-Gaming-Houses, Drawing-Rooms, Opera's, Levees and Assemblies;
where a Colonel by his Pay, Perquisites and Plunder, was qualified to outshine
many Peers of the Realm; and by the Influence of an exotic Habit and Demeanor,
added to other foreign Accomplishments, gave the Law to the whole Town, and was
copyed as the Standard-Pattern of whatever was refined in Dress, Equipage,
Conversation, or Diversions.

I remember in those Times, an admired Original of that Vocation, sitting in a
Coffeehouse near two Gentlemen, whereof one was of the Clergy, who were engaged
in some Discourse that savoured of Learning; this Officer thought fit to
interpose, and professing to deliver the Sentiments of his Fraternity, as well
as his own (and probably did so of too many among them) turning to the
Clergyman, spoke in the following Manner, D^n me, Doctor, say what you will,
the Army is the only School for Gentlemen. Do you think my Lord Marlborough
beat the French with Greek and Latin. D^n me, a Scholar when he comes into good
Company, what is he but an Ass? D^n me, I would be glad by G-d, to see any of
your Scholars with his Nouns, and his Verbs, and his Philosophy, and
Trigonometry, what a Figure he would make at a Siege or Blockade, or
rencountring -- D^n me, etc. After which he proceeded with a Volley of Military
Terms, less significant, sounding worse, and harder to be understood than any
that were ever coined by the Commentators upon Aristotle. I would not here be
thought to charge the Soldiery with Ignorance and Contempt of Learning, without
allowing Exceptions, of which I have known many; but however, the worse
Example, especially in a great Majority, will certainly prevail.

I have heard, that the late Earl of Oxford, in the Time of his Ministry, never
passed by White's Chocolate-House (the common Rendezvous of infamous Sharpers,
and Noble Cullies) without bestowing a Curse upon that famous Academy, as the
Bane of half the English Nobility. I have likewise been told another Passage
concerning that great Minister, which, because it gives a humorous Idea of one
principal Ingredient in modern Education, take as follows. Le Sack, the
famous French Dancingmaster, in great Admiration, asked a Friend, whether it
were true, that Mr. Harley was made an Earl and Lord Treasurer? And finding it
confirmed, said; Well, I wonder what the Devil the Queen could see in him; for
I attended him two Years, and he was the greatest Dunce that ever I taught.

Another Hindrance to good Education, and I think the greatest of any, is that
pernicious Custom in rich and noble Families, of entertaining French Tutors in
their Houses. These wretched Pedagogues are enjoined by the Father, to take
special Care that the Boy shall be perfect in his French; by the Mother, that
Master must not walk 'till he is hot, nor be suffered to play with other Boys,
nor be wet in his Feet, nor daub his Clothes, and to see the Dancingmaster
attends constantly, and does his Duty; she further insists, that the Child be
not kept too long poring on his Book, because he is subject to sore eyes, and
of a weakly Constitution.

By these Methods, the young Gentleman is in every Article as fully
accomplished at eight Years old as at eight and twenty, Age adding only to the
Growth of his Person and his Vice; so that if you should look at him in his
Boyhood through the magnifying End of a Perspective, and in his Manhood through
the other, it would be impossible to spy any Difference; the same Airs, the
same Strutt, the same Cock of his Hat, and Posture of his Sword, (as far as the
Change of Fashions will allow) the same Understanding, the same Compass of
Knowledge, with the very same Absurdity, Impudence and Impertinence of Tongue.

He is taught from the Nursery, that he must inherit a great Estate, and has
no need to mind his Book, which is a Lesson he never forgets to the End of his
Life. His chief Solace is to steal down and play at Span-farthing with the
Page, or young Black-a-moor, or little favorite Footboy, one of which is his
principal Confident and Bosom-Friend.

There is one young Lord in this Town, who, by an unexampled Piece of good
Fortune, was miraculously snatched out of the Gulf of Ignorance, confined to a
public School for a due Term of Years, well whipped when he deserved it, clad
no better than his Comrades, and always their Play-Fellow on the same Foot, had
no Precedence in the School, but what was given him by his Merit, and lost it
whenever he was negligent. It is well known how many Mutinies were bred at this
unprecedented Treatment, what Complaints among his Relations, and other Great
Ones of both Sexes; that his Stockings with silver Clocks were ravished from
him; that he wore his own Hair; that his Dress was undistinguished; that he was
not fit to appear at a Ball or Assembly, nor suffered to go to either: And it
was with the utmost Difficulty, that he became qualified for his present
Removal, where he may probably be farther persecuted, and possibly with
Success, if the Firmness of a very worthy Governor, and his own good
Dispositions will not preserve him. I confess, I cannot but wish he may go on
in the Way he began, because I have a Curiosity to know by so singular an
Experiment, whether Truth, Honor, Justice, Temperance, Courage, and good
Sense, acquired by a School and College Education, may not produce a very
tolerable Lad, although he should happen to fail in one or two of those
Accomplishments, which in the general Vogue are held so important to the
finishing of a Gentleman.

It is true, I have known an Academical Education to have been exploded in
public Assemblies; and have heard more than one or two Persons of high Rank
declare, they could learn nothing more at Oxford and Cambridge, than to drink
Ale and smoke Tobacco; wherein I firmly believed them, and could have added
some hundred Examples from my own Observation in one of those Universities; but
they all were of young Heirs sent thither, only for Form; either from Schools,
where they were not suffered by their careful Parents to stay above three
Months in the Year; or from under the Management of French Family-Tutors, who
yet often attended them to their College, to prevent all Possibility of their
Improvement: But, I never yet knew any one Person of Quality, who followed his
Studies at the University, and carried away his just Proportion of Learning,
that was not ready upon all Occasions to celebrate and defend that Course of
Education, and to prove a Patron of learned Men.

There is one Circumstance in a learned Education, which ought to have much
Weight, even with those who have no Learning at all. The Books read at School
and Colleges, are full of Incitements to Virtue, and Discouragements from Vice,
drawn from the wisest Reasons, the strongest Motives, and the most influencing
Examples. Thus, young Minds are filled early with an Inclination to Good, and
an Abhorrence of Evil, both which increase in them, according to the Advances
they make in Literature; and, although they may be, and too often are, drawn by
the Temptations of Youth, and the Opportunities of a large Fortune, into some
Irregularities, when they come forward into the great World, it is ever with
Reluctance and Compunction of Mind, because their Bias to Virtue still
continues. They may stray sometimes out of Infirmity or Compliance, but they
will soon return to the right Road, and keep it always in View. I speak only of
those Excesses, which are too much the Attendants of Youth and warmer Blood;
for, as to the Points of Honor, Truth, Justice, and other noble Gifts of the
Mind, wherein the Temperature of the Body has no Concern, they are seldom or
ever known to be mild.

I have engaged my self very unwarily in too copious a Subject for so short a
Paper. The present Scope I would aim at is to prove, that some Proportion of
human Knowledge appears requisite to those, who, by their Birth or Fortune, are
called to the making of Laws, and in a subordinate Way to the Execution of
them; and that such Knowledge is not to be obtained without a Miracle, under
the frequent, corrupt, and sottish Methods, of educating those, who are born to
Wealth or Titles. For, I would have it remembered, that I do by no Means
confine these Remarks to young Persons of Noble Birth; the same Errors running
through all Families, where there is Wealth enough to afford, that their Sons
(at least the Eldest) may be good for nothing. Why should my Son be a Scholar,
when it is not intended that he should live by his Learning? By this Rule, if
what is commonly said be true, that Money answers all Things, why should my
Son be honest, temperate, just, or charitable, since he has no Intention to
depend upon any of these Qualities for a Maintenance?

When all is done, perhaps, upon the Whole, the Matter is not so bad as I would
make it; and God, who works Good out of Evil, acting only by the ordinary
Cause and Rule of Nature, permits this continual Circulation of human Things
for his own unsearchable Ends. The Father grows rich by Avarice, Injustice,
Oppression; he is a Tyrant in the Neighborhood over Slaves and Beggars, whom
he calls his Tenants. Why should he desire to have Qualities infused into his
Son, which himself never possessed, or knew, or found the Want of in the
Acquisition of his Wealth? The Son bred in Sloth and Idleness, becomes a
Spendthrift, a Cully, a Profligate, and goes out of the World a Beggar, as his
Father came in: Thus the former is punished for his own Sins, as well as for
those of the latter. The Dunghill having raised a huge Mushroom of short
Duration, is now spread to enrich other Men's Lands. It is indeed of worse
Consequence, where noble Families are gone to Decay; because their Titles and
Privileges outlive their Estates: And, Politicians tell us, that nothing is
more dangerous to the Public, than a numerous Nobility without Merit or
Fortune. But even here, God has likewise prescribed some Remedy in the Order
of Nature, so many great Families coming to an End by the Sloth, Luxury, and
abandoned Lusts, which enervated their Breed through every Succession,
producing gradually a more effeminate Race, wholly unfit for Propagation.

A LETTER TO THE INTELLIGENCER.
SIR,
IT may appear to you perhaps a Thing very unnatural to receive a Complaint
from a Son against his Father; but the Treatment, which I meet with from mine,
is of such a Nature, that it is impossible for me not to complain.

You must know there are three Brethren of us, George, Patrick, and Andrew; I
am the second, but the last in Affection with my Father, for which I call
Heaven and Earth to Witness, I never committed any Fault to incur his
Displeasure, or to deserve his Neglect. But so it is, that the best of Men have
often Times been misled in the Choice of their Minions, and very undiscerning
in conferring their Favors where they ought.

If Parents could but once bring themselves to be impartial, it would, beyond
all doubt, produce a delighful Union in their Children, and be the most binding
Cement, that could be thought of, to preserve their Affections; because an
equal Dispensation of Favors would entirely remove all Cause of Murmuring,
Repining, or Envy; and, what is of the greatest Consequence, would secure the
Love and Esteem of their Children; whereas a partial Behavior in Parents must
necessarily produce the contrary.

But to state my Case, in the best Manner I can, and with an unbiassed Regard
to Truth, I think it first necessary to give you our Characters, with an
Account of my Father's Behavior, that you may be the better able to give me
your Advice.

First then, to begin with my Brother George. He was ever a great Lover of his
Belly, and formerly used to cram himself with Beef, Pudding, and White-Pot; but
for some Time past, he has taken more Delight in new fangled Tossups, and
French Keck-Shaws. This high Feeding does naturally dispose him to be haughty,
stubborn, choleric and rebellious, insomuch, that besides his Insults toward
others, he is ready upon all Occasions to fly in his owm Father's Face, and apt
to despise every Body but himself.

He is so various in his Opinions, that he is of as many Religions, as there
are and have been Sects, since the Beginning of Christianity; but the True and
Reformed Church as by Law established, is what he chiefly frequents. He was
once a great Admirer of ancient Learning, but he has long since quitted this,
for the Reading of Newspapers, Pamphlets, and Modern Languages. In his younger
Years, he was fond of manly Exercises, such as Fencing, Leaping, Boxing,
pitching the Bar, Wrestling, Hurling, Football, Hunting, etc. but of late he
has fallen into a strange and unaccountable Effeminacy, and seems to take
Delight in nothing but Masquerades, Plays, and Italian Opera's. He is very fond
of Italian magnificent Buildings, although entirely inconsistent with our
Climate, extravagant in the highest Degree in purchasing fine Paintings and
Statues, and no less expensive in vast extensive Parks and Gardens, by which
Means he has almost run out all his Fortune.

My younger Brother, Andrew, who has Cunning enough to outwit the Devil, joined
with Brother George some Years ago, and they manage so dexterously together,
that whatever they say, is a Law with my Father; however, they are not without
their Quarrels now and then; but Brother Andrew still comes by the worst,
although he is cautious enough to go always armed, for Brother George wears a
longer Sword. Brother Andrew is not very nice in his Food, but loves fine
Clothes. This I suppose he has learned abroad; for he is a great Traveller. His
chief Studies are Mathematics and the Civil-Law, in both which he has made a
considerable Progress. As for his Religion, although he openly professes
himself a most rigid Fanatic of the Kirk, yet he is shrewdly suspected to have
a Hankering after Popery. He has one eminent bad Quality, which is, that he
cannot easily forgive and forget. I remember I was once so unfortunate, as to
tell a fair Lady, (a Mistress of mine) before his Face, that I would stand by
her against him and all her other Adversaries, which he took heinously ill, and
has not forgiven me to this Hour, but lies upon the Watch to do me all the ill
Offices he can.

I come now to my own Character, in which I shall not conceal nor gloss over my
Vices, Errors, or Failings, but at the same Time, I shall not think it
inconsistent with Modesty, to tell you my Virtues.

I have but a small Fortune, can hardly keep Soul and Body together, yet out of
a Regard to my Family, which is very Ancient, I love to make what they call a
Figure, upon extraordinary Occasions. And now and then I furnish my Table with
Victuals and Liquors of the best Kinds, which makes my Father and Brother
George think I have got the World in a String. I am kind and hospitable to
Strangers, although they frequently rob my House, and turn my Children to lie
in the Barn.

I am so fond of Learning, that I put them to the best School in the Kingdom,
and I plainly see, they will be only the Wiser, but never the Richer for it;
because my Father uses all his Interest for Brother George's Sons, and the
greatest Dunce among them shall be better provided for, than the most Ingenious
of mine. And, I must say, I have some who are equal in Learning to the best of
his. I had a Design once, to follow Merchandise, that I might the better be
able to provide for my poor Children; but Brother George having a Mind to make
a Monopoly, prevailed upon my Father to join against me; and so at last they
contrived it, that I should sell nothing but a few of my Cattle, and some
Linen Cloth, which is all the Support I have; whereas Brother George can sell
every Thing he has, all the World over; and so cruel is he to me, that he will
not let me have even a Bit of his Dirt, if he thinks it will be of any
Advantage to me. My Religion is of three Sorts, the Established, Popish, and
Presbyterian, but I have a greater Share of the first in me: I think it is
best, because it encourages Obedience to my Father, more than either of the
other two. It is not long, since Brother George and Andrew were in a
Confederacy against my Father, with an Intent to turn him out of his House, and
give another the Possession; at which critical Juncture, I mustered up a great
Number of my Sons and Servants, to his Assistance, and, for ought I know, saved
both his Life and Fortune.

Soon after this, I had like to have been ruined by a Project; for one of my
Brother George's Family endeavored to persuade my Father, that Gold and Silver
were of no Use to me, and desired Leave to furnish me with a few Counters, in
Lieu thereof; and I fear, I should have been so weak, as to accept of them, had
it not been for the seasonable Remonstrances made by some of my own House.

These are a few of the many Hardships I have suffered; notwithstanding all
which, I am willing to continue in Passive Obedience to my dear Father; for I
have Reason to believe, that his Unkindness to me, is owing to ill Advisers,
who have prejudiced him against me and my Children; but I hope before long he
will be able to distinguish his most faithful Son. In the mean Time, I do
humbly entreat the Favor of you to write a Letter to my Father, which he may
see in Print, for I fear all my Letters to him hitherto have been intercepted.

PATRICK.


SIR,
YOU have not told me your Father's Name, nor his Quality, and therefore I am
at a Loss in what Manner I should address him. But in common Humanity (because
I think your Case deplorable) I will give you what Comfort I am able, together
with my best Advice.

You are not the only Instance of suffering Innocence, and therefore it ought
not surprze you, that Providence (for Reasons unaccountable to us) has laid two
great Trials in your Way, Oppression from your Brethren, and Unkindness from
your Father, this too without any Fault on your Side. If you did not meet with
these Afflictions, you would want an Opportunity of showing your Humility and
Resignation, as I understand you do not by your Letter.

Let me advise you to consider that your Condition is not quite so lamentable,
as that of Joseph, who triumphed in GOD's own Time over all his Misfortunes and
Sufferings, and at last had the Pleasure of doing Good even to his Persecutors;
but indeed there is this Difference, that his Grievance was chiefly from his
Brethren; for had his Father joined in the Cruelty, the Wounds would have
pierced nearer to his Heart.

I do not in the least doubt but there are some about your Father, who do you
ill Offices, (I hope some Time or other they will be detected:) You may find a
convenient Opportunity of getting fairly at him. State your Case and
expostulate with him concerning your own and your Childrens Sufferings. When he
hears your Story, and beholds your Sincerity, you may be sure of his Compassion
and a Redress; for there is no Heart so hard as not to sympathize with Real
Woe, no Advocate so powerful as Innocence. In the mean Time, let me conjure you
not to turn aside to the Right or to the Left, from that indispensable Duty,
which the express Laws of God enjoin you, for let me assure you that
Ingratitude to a Parent is, no less than Rebellion, like the Sin of Witchcraft.

I commit you to his Care and Direction, who is best able to govern the unruly
Affections of Men, to turn the Hearts of the Malicious, and to relieve and
support those who suffer for the Sake of Righteousness.

I am your faithful Friend, The INTELLIGENCER.


A SECOND LETTER TO THE Intelligencer.
Quantum stagna Tagi rudibus stillantia venis
Effluxere decus! quanto pretiosa metallo
Hermi ripa micat! quantas per Lidia culta
Despumat rutilas dives Pactolus arenas.
CLAUDIAN.
Mr. Intelligencer,
HAving lately, with great Candor and Impartiality, perused some of your
Papers upon the Distress and Poverty of this Island, which you take Care to
describe in the most pathetick Manner, you must forgive me if I differ from
you, and think it one of the most flourishing and wealthy Kingdoms in the whole
World. And to support my Opinion, I will venture to affirm, that there never
was such Affluence in ready Cash as at this present Juncture: For have we not
more Bankers than ever were known among us? And whether the Money circulates in
Specie or Paper, it is the same Thing to us, since those who would rather have
Cash than Paper, can (as is well known) have their Choice, whenever they
please. It is to be presumed that no Banker gives a NOTE before the Money is
first laid down on his Counter; then of Consequence there is as much Money as
there is Paper; and that we have a great deal of Paper is most certain,
therefore a great deal of Money. But I will proceed farther, and prove that we
have much more Money than Paper, because there are Multitudes who keep their
own Money. This appears from the great Number of Iron Chests imported from
Holland within these last seven Years; for what Use can they be of, but to
lodge Money? They are at least two hundred. We will suppose that these, one
with another, may contain two thousand Pounds a piece, then the Sum total
amounts to four hundred thousand Pounds, which is so much superfluous and
unnecessary Cash.

If this Island were not very wealthy, it is strongly to be presumed, that so
many wise and able Heads, Men of great Learning and superior Talents, whose
Reputations reached us from distant Regions long before they came among us, so
well distinguished in their own Countries for their great Knowledge in their
several Professions, and here more especially remarkable for their speaking in
public, and their profound Skill in Religion, Politics and Law: I say that
Men of such Accomplishments would never quit their own Native Soil, where so
many Estates are daily made, if they were not sure that this Island must, on
account of its greater Wealth, afford them Opportunities of making larger
Acquisitions than they could at home.

Have not almost all the Gentlemen through this Kingdom, for some Years past,
declined all profitable Employments, and left them to be filled by others? Can
there be a stronger Argument of their Wealth, than their choosing to live at
their Ease, out of Office, rather than be at the small Trouble which attends
the Discharge of a beneficial Employment?

Could so many estated Gentlemen through the North of Ireland, afford to keep so
much of their Lands waste and untenanted, if they had not Money enough by them
to live without Tenants; and would not the Tenants likewise be glad to take
this waste Land to plow and sow, but that they have ready Money enough to buy
Bread Corn and other Necessaries from all the World beside?

As another signal Mark of our Riches, there is scarce a Gentleman who does not
educate his Sons at our UNIVERSITY ( which as the World sees, wants not its due
Encouragement) where they live at vast Expenses, take Degrees, return to their
Fathers, who, without ever troubling Law or Gospel, maintain them afterward at
Home, like Gentlemen.

Do not many of our Nobility through Wantonness and Superfluity, reside
constantly in another Kingdom, where it is well known they make a better
Figure, as to Houses, Coaches, and Equipages, than their Neighbors? And do not
our young Peers, and Gentry, who go thither to see the World, Game, Race,
Drink, etc. beyond any in Great Britain, of the same Age and Quality? Which
they could not possibly do, if their Agents here had not an undrainable Fund to
supply them. For as the Philosopher says, Nemo dat quod non habet: Or as the
Juglar very elegantly expresses it, Where nothing is, there nothing can come
out.

If it be true, (I know it is confidently reported) that a great Number of
English Robbers are come over; that likewise is a very strong Argument of our
Wealth; for they would never quit the English Streets and Roads for ours,
unless they were sure to find an Advantage by the Change. It is most certain we
never had such a Number of Robbers as at this very Juncture; from whence we may
conclude, that they could not possibly multiply thus, if they did not find
Houses and People enough to rob, for all Professions and Trades increase
according to the Encouragement they meet with.

Are not whole Streets adding every Day to our Metropolis, when one would think
it large enough already? Some entire Streets and many Houses, I must confess,
are waste and uninhabited. But does not this show the Wealth and Wantonness of
the Inhabitants, who, not content with their present Dwellings, change them for
others more costly and expensive?

Do not great Numbers of our Inhabitants, daily go off to America? will any Man
say, this can be done with empty Pockets? Can any Man think otherwise, but that
it must be the Effect of vast Superfluity, when People wantonly take such long
Voyages, and Journeys, to go where they have no Business.

The last Argument I shall offer for the Wealth of this Kingdom, is the great
Number of Beggars in which it abounds; for it is a common Observation, that
Riches are the Parent of Idleness, Sloth, and Luxury; and are not these
naturally productive of Want and Beggary?

I could offer many more Arguments, but that I hope you and your Countrymen are
sufficiently convinced, by what I have said, that Ireland is a Place of great
Wealth, Affluence, and Plenty. Therefore let me advise you, the next Time you
put Pen to Paper, not to dress up Hibernia in Rags and Dirt, but cloth her in
Scarlet and fine Linen; for she can very well afford them. Draw the God of
Riches, hovering over your Island, shaking ten Thousand of Golden Feathers from
his Wings, much more than the Inhabitants can gather. And thus will your
Countrymen who have retrenched upon your last groundless Alarm, return to their
former Hospitality, and we shall see Halcyon, that is Irish, Days once more.

A True and Faithful NARRATIVE OF What passed in LONDON during the general
Consternation of all Ranks and Degrees of Mankind; On Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, and Friday last.
ON Tuesday the 13th of October, Mr. Whiston held his Lecture near the Royal
Exchange, to an Audience of Fourteen worthy Citizens, his Subscribers and
constant Hearers. Besides these, there were five chance Auditors for that Night
only, who had paid their Shillings a-peice. I think my self obliged to be very
particular in this Relation, lest my Veracity should be suspected; which makes
me appeal to the Men who were Present; of which Number, I my self was one.
Their Names are Henry Watson, Haberdasher. George Hancock, Druggist. John
Lewis, Dry-Salter. William Jones, Corn-Chandler. Henry Theobald, Watchmaker.
James Peter's, Draper. Thomas Floyer, Silversmith. John Wells, Brewer. Samuel
Greg, Soap-Boyler. William Cooley, Fishmonger. James Harper, Hosier. Robert
Tucker, Stationer. George Ford, Ironmonger. Daniel Lynch, Apothecary.
Apprentices. William Bennet, David Summers, Charles Lock, Leonard Daval, Henry
Croft,



Mr. Whiston began by acquainting us, that (contrary to his Advertisement) he
thought himfelf in duty and conscience, obliged to change the subject Matter of
his intended discourse. -- Here he paused, and seemed for a short space as it
were lost in Devotion and mental Prayer; after which, with great earnestness
and vehemence he spoke as follows.

"Friends and Fellow Citizens, all speculative Science is at an end; the Period
of all things is at Hand; on Friday next this World shall be no more. Put not
your confidence in me Brethren, for to morrow Morning five Minutes after five
the Truth will be Evident; in that instant the Comet shall appear, of which I
have heretofore warned you. As ye have heard, believe. Go hence, and prepare
your Wives, your Families and Friends, for the universal Change."

At this solemn and dreadful Prediction, the whole Society appeared in the
utmost Astonishment: but it would be unjust not to remember that Mr. Whiston
himself was in so calm a Temper, as to return a Shilling a piece to the Youths
who had been disappointed of their Lecture, which I thought from a Man of his
Integrity a convincing Proof of his own Faith in the Prediction.

As we thought it a Duty, in Charity to warn all Men; in two or three Hours the
News had spread through the City. At first indeed, our report met with but
little Credit, it being by our greatest dealers in Stocks, thought only a
Court-Artifice to sink them, that some choice Favorites might purchase at a
lower Rate; for the South Sea, that very Evening fell five per Cent. the India,
eleven; and all the other Funds in Proportion. But at the Court-end of the
Town, our Attestations were entirely disbeliev'd or turned into ridicule; yet
nevertheless the News spread every where, and was the subject matter of all
Conversation.

That very Night, (as I was credibly informed) Mr. Whiston was sent for to a
great Lady, who is very curious in the Learned Sciences, and addicted to all
the Speculative Doubts of the most able Philosophers; but he was not now to be
found: and since at other times, he has been known not to decline that Honor,
I make no doubt he concealed himself to attend the great Business of his Soul:
But whether it was the Lady's Faith, or Inquisitiveness, that ocasion'd her to
send, is a Point I shall not presume to determine. As for his being sent for to
the Secretary's Office by a Messenger, it is now known to be a Matter
notoriously false, and indeed at first it had little credit with me, that so
Zealous and Honest a Man should be ordered into Custody, as a Seditious
Preacher, who is known to be so well affected to the present happy
Establishment.

'Twas now I reflected with exceeding trouble and sorrow, that I had disused
Family Prayers for above five Years, and (though it has been a Custom of late
entirely neglected by Men of any Business or Station) I determined within
myself no longer to omit so reasonable and religious a Duty. I acquainted my
Wife with my Intentions: But two or three Neighbors having been engaged to Sup
with us that Night, and many Hours being unwarily spent at Cards, I was
prevailed upon by her, to put it off till the next Day; she reasoning, that it
would be time enough to take off the Servants from their Business (which this
practice must infallibly occasion for an Hour or two every Day) after the Comet
had made its appearance.

Zachary Bowen, a Quaker, and my next Neighbor, had no sooner heard of the
Prophecy but he made me a Visit. I informed him of every thing I had heard, but
found him quite obstinate in his unbelieve; for, said he, be comforted, Friend,
thy tidings are Impossibilities, for were these things to happen, they must
have been foreseen by some of our Brethren. This indeed (as in all other
spiritual Cases with this Set of People) was his only reason against believing
me; and, as he was fully persuaded that the Prediction was erroneous, he in a
very neighbourly Manner admonished me against selling my Stock, at the present
low Price; which, he said, beyond dispute must have a Rise before Monday, when
this unreasonable Consternation should be over.

But on WEDNESDAY Morning (I believe to the exact Calculation of Mr. Whiston)
the Comet appeared: For at three Minutes aster five by my own Watch, I saw it.
He indeed, foretold that it would be seen at five Minutes after Five, but as
the best Watches may be a Minute or two too slow, I am apt to think his
Calculation just to a Minute.

In less than a quarter of an Hour, all Cheapside was crowded with a vast
concourse of People, and notwithstanding it was so early, it is thought that
through all that part of the Town, there was not Man, Woman or Child, except
the Sick, or Infirm, left in their Beds. From my own Balcony, I am consident, I
saw several Thousands in the Street, and counted at least seventeen who were
upon their Knees, and seemed in actual Devotion. Eleven of them indeed appeared
to be old Women of about Fourscore; The Six others, were Men in an advanced
Life, but (as I could guess) two of them might be under Seventy.

It is highly probable, that an event of this Nature, may be passed over by the
greater Historians of our Times, as conducing very little or nothing to the
unravelling and laying open the deep Schemes of Politicians and Mysteries of
State; for which reason, I thought it might not be unacceptable to record the
Facts, which in the Space of three Days came to my Knowledge, either as an
Eyewitness, or from unquestionable Authorities; nor can I think this Narrative
will be entirely without its Use, as it may enable us to form a more just Idea
of our Countrymen in general, particularly in regard to their Faith, Religion,
Morals and Politics.

Before WEDNESDAY Noon, the Belief was universal that the Day of Judgment was
at Hand, insomuch, that a Waterman of my accquaintance told me he counted no
less than one hundred and twenty three Clergymen, who had been ferry'd over to
Lambeth before twelve a-Clock: these, it is said, went thither, to Petition,
that a short Prayer might be Penned and Ordered, there being none in the
Service upon that occasion. But as in things of this Nature, it is necessary
that the Council be consulted, their request was not immediately complied with;
and this I affirm to be the true and only Reason that the Churches were not
that Morning so well attended; and is in no ways to be imputed to the Fears and
Consternation of the Clergy, with which the Freethinkers have since very
unjustly reproached them.

My Wife and I went to Church (where we had not been for many Years on a
Weekday) and, with a very large Congregation, were disappointed of the
Service. But (what will be scarce credible) by the carelessness of a 'Prentice,
in our absence, we had a Piece of fine Cambric carried off by a Shop-lifter, so
little impression was yet made on the minds of those wicked Women!

I cannot omit the care of a particular Director of the Bank; I hope the worthy
and wealthy Knight will forgive me that I endeavor to do him Justice; for it
was unquestionably owing to Sir G^ H^'s sagacity that all the Fire-Offices were
required to have a particular Eye upon the Bank of England. Let it be recorded
to his Praise that in the general hurry, this struck him as his nearest and
tenderest concern; but the next day in the Evening, after having taken due care
of all his Books, Bills and Bonds, I was informed, his mind was wholly turned
upon Spiritual Matters; yet, ever and anon, he could not help expressing his
resentment against the Tories and Jacobites, to whom he imputed that sudden Run
upon the Bank which happened on this occasion.

A Great Man (whom at this time it may not be prudent to name) employed all the
Wednesday Morning, to make up such an Account as might appear fair, in case he
should be called upon to produce it on the Friday; but was forced to desist,
after having for several Hours together attempted it, not being able to bring
himself to a resolution to trust the many hundred Articles of his secret
Transactions upon Paper.

Another seemed to be very melancholy, which his flatterers imputed to his
dread of losing his Power in a Day or two; but I rather take it, that his chief
concern was, the Terror of being tried in a Court that could not be influenced
and where a Majority of Voices could avail him nothing. It was observed too,
that he had few Visitors that Day; this added so much to his Mortification,
that he read through the first Chapter of the Book of Job, and wept over it
bitterly; in short, he seemed a true Penitent in every thing but in Charity to
his Neighbor. No business was that Day done in his Compting-House; it is said
too, that he was advised to Restitution, but I never heard that he complied
with it any farther than in giving half a Crown a piece to several crazed, and
starving Creditors, who attended in the outward Room.

Three of the Maids of Honor sent to countermand their Birthday Clothes; two
of them burnt all their Collections of Novels and Romances, and sent to a
Bookseller's in Pall Mall to buy each of them a Bible, and Taylor's Holy Living
and Dying. But I must do all of them the Justice to acknowledge, that they
showed a very decent Behavior in the drawing Room, and restrained themselves
from those innocent Freedoms and little Levities so commonly incident to young
Ladies of their Profession. So many Birthday Suits were countermanded the next
Day, that most of the Tailors and Mantuamakers discharged all their Journeymen
and Women. A grave elderly Lady of great Erudition and Modesty who visits these
young Ladies, seemed to be extremely shocked, by the Apprehensions that She was
to appear naked before the whole World; and no less so, that all Mankind was to
appear naked before Her; which might so much divert her Thoughts, as to
incapacitate her to give Ready and apt Answers to the Interrogatories that
might be made her. The Maids of Honor who had both Modesty and Curiosity,
could not imagine the Sight so disagreeable as was represented; nay, one of
them went so far as to say, she perfectly longed to see it; for it could not be
so indecent, when every body was to be alike; and they had a Day or two to
prepare themselves, to be seen in that condition. Upon this reflection, each of
them ordered a Bathing-Tub to be got ready that Evening, and a Looking-Glass to
be set by it. So much are these young Ladies both by Nature and Custom addicted
to cleanly appearance.

A West-Country Gentleman told me, he got a Church-Lease filled up that Morning
for the same Sum which had been refused for three Years successively. I must
impute this merely to accident; for I cannot imagine that any Divine could take
the advantage of his Tenant, in so unhandsome a Manner; or that the shortness
of the Life was in the least his Consideration; though I have heard the same
worthy Prelate aspersed and malign'd since upon this very Account.

The Term being so near, the alarm among the LAWYERS was inexpressible, though
some of them, I was told, were so vain as to promise themselves some advantages
in making their defense, by being versed in the Practice of our earthly Courts.
It is said too, that some of the chief Pleaders were heard to express great
satisfaction, that there had been but sew State-Tryals of late Years. Several
Attorneys demanded the return of Fees that had been given the Lawyers: but it
was answered the Fee was undoubtedly charged to their Client, and that they
could not connive at such Injustice, as to suffer it to be sunk in the
Attorney's Pockets. Our sage and learned Judges had great consolation, insomuch
as they had not pleaded at the Bar for several Years; the Barristers rejoiced
in that they were not Attorneys, and the Attorneys felt no less satisfaction
that they were not Petti-foggers, Scriveners, and other meaner Officers of the
Law.

As to the ARMY, far be it from me to conceal the Truth. Every Soldier's
behavior was as undismayed, and undaunted, as if nothing was to happen: I
impute not this to their want of Faith, but to their martial Disposition;
though I cannot help thinking they commonly accompany their commands with more
Oaths than are requisite, of which there was no remarkable diminution this
Morning on the Parade in St. James's Park. But possibly it was by choice, and
on consideration, that they continued this way of Expression, not to intimidate
the common Soldiers, or give occasion to suspect that even the Fear of
Damnation could make any impression upon their Superior Officers. A Duel was
fought the same Morning between two Colonels, not occasioned, (as was reported)
because the one was put over the other's Head; that being a Point which might
at such a Juncture have been accommodated by the Mediation of Friends; but as
this was upon the account of a Lady, 'twas judged it could not be put off at
this time, above all others, but demanded immediate Satisfaction. I am apt to
believe that a young Officer who desired his Surgeon to defer putting him into
a Salivation till Saturday, might make this request out of some Opinion he had
of the truth of the Prophecy; for the apprehensions of any danger in the
Operation could not be his Motive, the Surgeon himself having assured me that
he had before undergone three severe Operations of the like Nature, with great
resignation and fortitude.

There was an Order issued, that the Chaplains of the several Regiments should
attend their Duty; but as they were dispersed about in several parts of
England, it was believed, that most of them could not be found, or so much as
heard of, till the great Day was over.

Most of the considerable PHYSICIANS by their outward demeanor seemed to be
Unbelievers; but at the same time, they every where insinuated, that there
might be a Pestilential Malignancy in the Air, occasioned by the Comet, which
might be armed against by proper and timely Medicines. This caution had but
little effect; for as the time approached, the Christian Resignation of the
People increased, and most of them (which was never before known) had their
Souls more at Heart, than their Bodies.

If the Reverend CLERGY showed more Concern than others, I charitably impute it
to their great charge of Souls; and what confirmed me in this Opinion was, that
the Degrees of Apprehension and Terror could be distinguished to be greater or
less, according to their Ranks and Degrees in the Church.

The like might be observed in all sorts of Ministers, though not of the Church
of England; the higher their Rank, the more was their Fear.

I speak not of the COURT, for fear of offense; and I forbear Inserting the
Names of particular Persons, to avoid the imputation of Slander, so that the
Reader will allow this Narrative must be deficient, and is therefore desired to
accept hereof rather as a Sketch, than a regular circumstantial History.

I was not informed of any Persons who showed the least Joy, except three
Malefactors who were to be executed the Monday following, and one Old Man, a
constant Church-goer, who being at the point of Death, expressed some
satisfaction at the News.

On Thursday Morning there was little or nothing transacted in Change-Alley;
there were a Multitude of Sellers, but so few Buyers, that one cannot affirm
the Stocks bore any certain Price except among the Jews; who this Day, reaped
great Profit by their Infidelity. There were many who called themselves
Christians, who offered to buy for time, but as these were People of great
Distinction, I choose not to mention them, because in effect it would seem to
accuse them both of Avarice, and Infidelity.

The Run upon the Bank is too well known to need a particular Relation; for it
never can be forgotten that no one Person whatever (except the Directors
themselves, and some of their particular Friends and Associates) could convert
a Bill all that Day into Specie; all hands being employed to serve them.

In the several Churches of the City and Suburbs, there were seven Thousand two
Hundred and Forty Five, who publicly and solemnly declared before the
Congregation, that they took to Wife their several kept Mistresses, which was
allowed as valid Marriage, the Priests not having time to pronounce the
Ceremony in Form.

At St. Bride's Church in Fleetstreet, Mr. Woolston (who writ against the
Miracles of our Savior) in the utmost Terrors of Conscience, made a public
Recantation. Dr. Mandevil; (who had been groundlessly reported formerly to have
done the same) did it now in good earnest at St. James's Gate; as did also at
the Temple Church several Gentlemen, who frequent Coffee-Houses near the Bar.
So great was the Faith and Fear of two of them, that they dropped Dead on the
Spot; but I will not record their Names, lest I should be thought invidiously
to lay an Odium on their Families and Posterity.

Most of the Players who had very little Faith before, were now desirous of
having as much as they could, and therefore embraced the Roman Catholic
Religion; the same thing was observed of some Bawds, and Ladies of Pleasure.

An Irish Gentleman out of pure Friendship came to make me a Visit, and advised
me to hire a Boat for the ensuing Day, and told me, that unless I gave earnest
for one immediately, he feared it might be too late; for his Countrymen had
secured almost every Boat upon the River, as judging that, in the general
Conflagration to be upon the Water would be the safest Place.

There were two Lords, and three Commoners, who, out of a scruple of
Conscience, very hastily threw up their Pensions, as imagining a Pension was
only an annual retaining Bribe. All the other great Pensioners, I was told, had
their Scruples quieted by a Clergyman or two of distinction, whom they happily
consulted.

It was remarkable that several of our very richest Tradesmen of the City, in
common Charity, gave away Shillings and Six-pences to the Beggars, who plied
about the Church Doors; and at a particular Church in the City, a Wealthy
Churchwarden with his own Hands distributed Fifty twelve-penny Loaves to the
Poor by way of Restitution for the many great and costly Feasts, which he had
eaten of at their expense.

Three great Ladies, a Valet de Chamber, two Lords, a Custom-House Officer,
five Halfpay Captains, and a Baronet, (all noted Gamesters) came publicly into
a Church at Westminster, and deposited a very considerable Sum of Money in the
Minister's Hands; the Parties whom they had defrauded, being either out of
Town, or not to be found. But so great is the Hardness of Heart of this
Fraternity, that among either the Noble, or Vulgar Gamesters, (though the
Profession is so general) I did not hear of any other restitution of this Sort.
At the same time I must observe that (in comparison of these) through all parts
of the Town, the Justice and Penitence of the Highway-Men, House-breakers, and
common Pick-Pockets was very remarkable.

The Directors of our Public Companies were in such dreadful apprehensions,
that one would have thought a Parliamentary Enquiry was at hand; yet so great
was their presence of Mind, that all the Thursday Morning was taken up in
private Transfers, which by malicious People was thought to be done with design
to conceal their Effects.

I forbear mentioning the private Confessions of particular Ladies to their
Husbands; for as their Children were born in Wedlock, and of consequence are
Legitimate, it would be an invidious Task to record them as Bastards; and
particularly after their several Husbands have so charitably forgiven them.

The Evening and Night, through the whole Town, were spent in Devotions both
Public and Private; the Churches for this one Day, were so crowded by the
Nobility and Gentry, that Thousands of common People were seen praying in the
public Streets. In short, one would have thought the whole Town had been
really and seriously religious. But what was very remarkable, all the different
Persuasions kept by themselves, for as each thought the other would be damned,
not one would join in Prayer with the other.

At length FRIDAY came, and the People covered all the Streets; Expecting,
Watching and Praying. But as the Day wore away, their Fears first began to
abate, then lessened every hour, at Night they were almost extinct, till the
total Darkness, that hitherto used to terrify, now comforted every Free-thinker
and Atheist. Great numbers went together to the Taverns, bespoke Suppers, and
broke up whole Hogsheads for joy. The subject of all Wit and Conversation was
to ridicule the Prophecy, and railly each other. All the Quality and Gentry
were perfectly ashamed, nay, some utterly disowned that they had manifested any
Signs of Religion.

But the next Day, even the Common People, as well as their Betters, appeared
in their usual state of Indifference. They Drank, they Whor'd, they Swore, they
Ly'd, they Cheated, they Plundered, they Gam'd, they Quarreled, they Murdered.
In short, the World went on in the old Channel.

I need not give any Instances of what will so easily be credited, but I cannot
omit relating, that Mr. Woolston advertised, in that very Saturday's
Evening-Post, a new Treatise against the Miracles of our Savior; and that the
few, who had given up their Pensions the Day before, solicited to have them
continued; which, as they had not been thrown up upon any Ministerial Point, I
am informed was readily granted.

THE JOURNAL OF A Modern LADY.
IT was a most unfriendly Part
In you who ought to know my Heart,
So well acquainted with my Zeal
For all the Female Commonweal:
How could it come into your Mind,
To pitch on me, of all Mankind,
Against the Sex to write a Satyr,
And brand me for a Woman-Hater?
On me, who think them all so fair,
They rival Venus to a Hair;
Their Virtues never ceased to sing,
Since first I learned to tune a String.
Methinks I hear the Ladies cry,
Will he his Character belie?
Must never our Misfortunes end?
And have we lost our only Friend?
Ah, lovely Nymphs remove your Fears,
No more let fall those precious Tears.
Sooner shall, etc.
[ Here several Verses are omitted.]

The Hound be hunted by the Hare,
Than I turn Rebel to the Fair.
'Twas you engaged me first to write,
Then gave the Subject out of Spite.
The Journal of a Modern Dame,
Is by my promise what you claim;
My Word is past, I must submit,
And yet perhaps you may be bit.
I but transcribe, for not a Line
Of all the Satyr shall be mine.
Compelled by you to tag in Rhimes
The common Slanders of the Times,
Of modern Times, the Guilt is yours,
And me my Innocence secures:
Unwilling Muse begin thy Lay,
The Annals of a Female Day.
By Nature turned to play the Rake-well,
(As we shall show you in the Sequel)
The modern Dame is waked by Noon,
Some Authors say not quite so soon,
Because, though sore against her Will,
She fat all Night up at Quadrill.
She stretches, gapes, unglues her Eyes,
And asks if it be time to rise;
Of Headache, and the Spleen complains;
And then to cool her heated Brains,
Her Nightgown and her Slippers brought her,
Takes a large Dram of Citron Water.
Then to her Glass; and " Betty, pray
" Don't I look frightfully to Day?
" But, was it not confounded hard?
" Well, if I ever touch a Card:
" Four Mattadores, and lose Codil!
" Depend upon it, I never will.
" But run to Tom, and bid him fix
" The Ladies here to Night by Six."
Madam, the Goldsmith waits below.
He says, his Business is to know
If you will redeem the Silver Cup,
You pawned to him? -- First show him up.
Your Dressing-Plate, he will be content
To take, for Interest Cent. per Cent.
And, Madam, there is my Lady Spade
Has sent this Letter by her Maid.
" Well I remember what she won;
" And has she sent so soon to dun?
" Here, carry down those ten Pistoles
" My Husband left to pay for Coals:
" I thank my Stars, they are all light;
" And I may have Revenge to Night."
Now, loit'ring over her Tea and Cream,
She enters on her usual Theme;
Her last Night's ill Success repeats,
Calls Lady Spade a hundred Cheats:
She slipped Spadillo in her Breast,
Then thought to turn it to a Jest.
There Is Mrs. Cut and she combine,
And to each other give the Sign.
Through every Game pursues her Tale,
Like Hunters over their Evening Ale.
Now to another Scene give Place,
Enter the Folks with Silks and Lace:
Fresh Matter for a World of Chat,
Right Indian this, right Macklin that;
Observe this Pattern; there is a Stuff,
I can have Customers enough.
Dear Madam, you are grown so hard,
This Lace is worth twelve Pounds a Yard:
Madam, if there be Truth in Man,
I never sold so cheap a Fan.
This Business of Importance over,
And Madam almost dressed by Four;
The Footman, in his usual Phrase,
Comes up with, Madam, Dinner stays;
She answers in her usual Style,
The Cook must keep it back a while;
I never can have Time to Dress,
No Woman Breathing takes up less;
I Am hurried so, it makes me sick,
I wish the Dinner at Old Nick.
At Table now she acts her Part,
Has all the Dinner-Cant by Heart:
' I thought we were to Dine alone,
' My Dear, for sure if I had known
' This Company would come to Day --
' But really it is my Spouse's Way;
' He Is so unkind, he never sends
' To tell, when he invites his Friends:
' I wish ye may but have enough.'
And while, with all this paultry Stuff,
She sits tormenting every Guest,
Nor gives her Tongue one Moment's Rest,
In Phrases battered, stale, and trite,
Which Modern Ladies call polite;
You see the Booby Husband sit
In Admiration at her Wit!
But let me now a while survey
Our Madam over her Evening Tea;
Surrounded with her Noisy Clans
Of Prudes, Coquets, and Harridans;
When frighted at the clamorous Crew,
Away the God of Silence flew,
And fair Diseretion left the Place,
And Modesly with blushing Face;
Now enters overweening Pride,
And Scandal ever gaping wide,
Hypocrisy with Frown severe,
Scurrility with gibing Air;
Rude Laughter seeming like to burst,
And Malice always judging worst;
And Vanity with Pocket-Glass,
And Impudence with Front of Brass;
And studied Affectation came,
Each Limb, and Feature out of Frame;
While Ignorance, with Brain of Lead,
Flew hovering over each Female Head.
Why should I ask of thee, my Muse,
An Hundred Tongues, as Poets use,
When, to give every Dame her due,
An Hundred Thousand were too few!
Or how should I, alas! relate
The Sum of all their Senseless Prate,
Their Inuendo's, Hints, and Slanders,
Their Meanings lewd, and double 'Entendres,
Now comes the general Scandal-Charge,
What some invent, the rest enlarge;
And, "Madam, if it be a Lie,
" You have the Tale as cheap as I:
" I must conceal my Author's Name,
" But now it is known to common Fame.
Say, foolish Females, Old and Blind,
Say, by what fatal Turn of Mind,
Are you on vices most severe,
Wherein yourselves have greatest Share?
Thus every Fool her self deludes;
The Prudes condemn the absent Prudes;
Mopsa, who stinks her Spouse to Death,
Accuses Chloe's tainted Breath;
Hircina rank with Sweat, presumes
To censure Phillis for Perfumes;
While crooked Cynthia swearing says,
That Florimel wears Iron Stays;
Chloe's of every Coxcomb jealous,
Admires how Girls can talk with Fellows,
And full of Indignation frets
That Women should be such Coquets:
Iris, for Scandal most notorious,
Cries, "Lord, the World is so censorious!
And Rufa with her Combs of Lead,
Whispers that Sappho's Hair is Red:
Aura, whose Tongue you hear a Mile hence,
Talks half a Day in Praise of Silence;
And Silvia full of inward Guilt,
Calls Amoret an arrant Jilt.
Now Voices over Voices rise;
While each to be the loudest vies,
They contradict, affirm, dispute,
No single Tongue one Moment mute;
All mad to speak, and none to hearken,
They set the very Lap-Dog barking;
Their Chattering makes a louder Din
Than Fish-Wives over a Cup of Gin:
Not Schoolboys at a Barring-out,
Raised ever such incessant Rout:
The Jumbling Particles of M atter
In Chaos make not such a Clatter:
Far less the Rabble roar and rail,
When Drunk with sour Election Ale.
Nor do they trust their Tongue alone,
To speak a Language of their own;
But read a Nod, a Shrug, a Look,
Far better than a printed Book;
Convey a Libel in a Frown;
And wink a Reputation down;
Or by the tossing of the Fan,
Describe the Lady and the Man.
But, see the Female Club disbands,
Each, twenty Visits on her Hands:
Now all alone poor Madam fits,
In Vapors and Hysteric Fits:
" And was not Tom this Morning sent;
" I Would lay my Life he never went:
" Past Six, and not a living Soul!
" I might by this have won a Vole."
A dreadful Interval of Spleen!
How shall we pass the Time between?
" Here Bet ty, let me take my Drops,
" And feel my Pulse, I know it stops:
" This Head of mine, Lord, how it Swims!
" And such a Pain in all my Limbs!
Dear Madam, try to take a Nap --
But now they hear a Foot-Man's Rap:
" Go run, and light the Ladies up:
" It must be One before we Sup.
The Table, Cards, and Counters set,
And all the Gamester Ladies met,
Her Spleen and Fits recovered quite,
Our Madam can sit up all Night;
" Whoever comes I Am not within --
Quadrill's the Word, and so begin.
How can the Muse her Aid impart,
Unskilled in all the Terms of Art!
Or in harmonious Numbers put
The Deal, the Shuffle, and the Cut?
All the superfluous Whims relate,
That fill a Female Gamester's Pate?
What Agony of Soul she feels
To see a Knave's inverted Heels:
She draws up Card by Card, to find
Good Fortune peeping from behind;
With panting Heart, and earnest Eyes,
In hope to see Spadillo rise;
In vain, alas! her Hope is fed;
She draws an Ace, and sees it red.
In ready Counters never pays,
But pawns her Snuff Box, Rings, and Keys.
Ever with some new Fancy struck,
Tries twenty Charms to mend her Luck.
" This Morning when the Parson came,
" I said I should not win the Game.
" This odious Chair how came I stuck in it,
" I think I never had good Luck in it.
" I Am so uneasy in my Stays;
" Your Fan, a Moment, if you please.
" Stand further Girl, or get you gone,
" I always lose when you look on.
Lord, Madam, you have lost Codill;
I never saw you play so ill.
" Nay, Madam, give me leave to say
" 'Twas you that threw the Game away;
" When Lady Tricksy played a Four,
" You took it with a Matadore;
" I saw you touch your Wedding-Ring
" Before my Lady called a King.
" You spoke a Word began with H,
" And I know whom you meant to teach,
" Because you held the King of Hearts;
" Fie, Madam, leave these little Arts.
That Is not so bad as one that rubs
Her Chair to call the King of Clubs,
And makes her Part'ner understand
A Matadore is in her Hand.
" Madam you have no Cause to flounce,
" I swear I saw you thrice renounce.
And truly, Madam, I know when
Instead of Five you scor'd me Ten.
Spadillo here has got a Mark,
A Child may know it in the Dark:
I Guess the Hand, it seldom fails,
I wish some Folks would pare their Nails.
While thus they rail, and scold and storm,
It passes but for common Form;
Most conscious that they all speak true,
And give each other but their Due;
It never interrupts the Game,
Or makes 'em sensible of Shame.
The Time too precious now to waste,
And Supper gobbled up in haste,
Again a-fresh to Cards they run,
As if they had but just begun.
Yet shall I not again repeat
How often they Squabble, Snarl and Cheat:
At last they hear the Watchman knock,
A Frosty Morn -- Past Four a-Clock.
The Chair-Men are not to be found,
" Come, let us play the the other Round.
Now, all in hastle they huddle on
Their Hoods, their Cloaks, and get them gone:
But first the Winner must invite
The Company tomorrow Night.
Unlucky Madam left in Tears,
(Who now again Quadrill forswears)
With empty Purse, and aching Head,
Steals to her sleeping Spouse to Bed.
THE COUNTRY LIFE.
THALIA, tell in sober Lays,
How George, Nim, Dan, Dean, pass their Days.
Begin, my Muse; First from our Bowers
We issue forth at difs'rent Hours;
At seven, the Dean in Nightgown dressed,
Goes round the House to wake the rest;
At nine, grave Nim and George facetious
Go to the Dean to read Lucretius;
At ten, my Lady comes and hectors,
And kisses George, and ends our Lectures,
And when She has him by the Neck fast,
Hauls him, and scolds Us down to Break fast,
We squander there an Hour or more,
And then all Hands, Boys, to the Oar,
All, Heteroctil Dan except,
Who neither Time, nor Order kept,
But by peculiar Whimsies drawn,
Peeps in the Ponds to look for Spawn,
O'ersees the Work, or Dragon My Lord's Boat.
rows,
Or spoils a Text, or mends his Hose;
Or -- but proceed we in our Journal --
At two, or after, we return all.
From the four Elements assembling,
Warned by the Bell, all Folks come trembling;
From airy Garrets some descend,
Some from the Lake's remotest End:
My Lord and Dean the Fire forsake,
Dan leaves the Earthly Spade and Rake:
The Loit'rers quake, no Corner hides them,
And Lady Betty soundly chides them.
Now Water's brought and Dinner's done:
With Church and King the Lady's gone:
(Not reckoning half an Hour we pass
In talking over a moderate Glass.)
Dan, growing drowsy like a Thief,
Steals off to dose away his Beef,
And this must pass for reading Hammond --
While George and Dean go to Back-Gammon.
George, Nim, and Dean set out at four,
And then again, Boys, to the Oar.
But when the Sun goes to the Deep,
(Not to disturb him in his Sleep,
Or make a Rumbling over his Head,
His Candle out, and He a-bed)
We watch his Motions to a Minute,
And leave the Flood, when he goes in it.
Now stinted in the shortning Day,
We go to Prayers, and then to play:
Till Supper comes, and after that,
We sit an Hour to drink and chat.
It Is late -- the old and younger Pairs,
By The Footman.
Adam lighted, walk up Stairs.
The weary Dean goes to his Chamber,
And Nim and Dan to Garret clamber.
So when the Circle we have run,
The Curtain falls, and we have done.
I might have mentioned several Facts,
Like Episodes between the Acts;
And tell who loses, and who wins,
Who gets a Cold, who breaks his Shins;
How Dan caught nothing in his Net,
And how the Boat was overset;
For Brevity I have retrenched
How in the Lake the Dean was drenched:
It would be an Exploit to brag on,
How valiant George rode over the Dragon,
How steady in the Stern he sat,
And saved his Oar, but lost his Hat:
How Nim (no Hunter ever could match him,)
Still brings us Hares when he can catch 'em:
How skilfully Dan mends his Nets;
How Fortune fails him when he sets.
Or how the Dean delights to vex
The Ladies, or lampoon the Sex:
Or how our Neighbor lifts his Nose
To tell what every Schoolboy knows,
Then with his Finger on his Thumb
Explaining, strikes Opposures dumb:
Or how his Wife, that Female Pedant,
(But now there need no more be said on it)
Shows all her Secrets of Housekeeping;
For Candles how she trucks her Dripping;
Was forced to send three Miles for Yest
To brew her Ale, and raise her Paste;
Tells every thing that you can think of,
How she cured Tommy of the Chin-cough;
What gave her Brats and Pigs the Meazles,
And how her Doves were killed by Wheezles;
How Jowler howled, and what a Fright
She had with Dreams the other Night.
But now, since I have gone so far on,
A Word or two of Lord Chief Baron;
And tell how little Weight he sets
On all Whig Papers, and Gazetts;
But for the Politics of Pue A News-Writer.

Thinks every Syllable is true.
And since he owns the King of Sweden
Is dead at last, without evading,
Now all his Hopes are in the Czar;
" Why, Muscovy is not so sar,
" Down the Black Sea and up the Streights,
And in a Month he is at your Gates;
" Perhaps from what the Packet brings
" By Christmas we shall see strange Things."
Why should I tell of Ponds and Drains,
What Carps we met with for our Pains;
Of Sparrows tamed, and Nuts innumerable
To choke the Girls, and to consume-a-Rabble.
But you, who are a Scholar, know
How transient are all Things below,
How prone to change is humane Life!
Last Night arrived Clem. and his Wife --
This grand Event half broke our Measures;
Their Reign began with cruel Seizures;
The Dean must with his Quilt supply
The Bed in which these Tyrants lie,
Nim lost his Whig Block, Dan his Jordan,
(My Lady says she cannot afford one)
George is half scared out of his Wits,
For Clem. gets all the dainty Bits.
Henceforth expect a different Survey,
This House will soon turn topsy-turvy.
They talk of further Alterations,
Which causes many Speculations.
ON Cutting down the OLD THORN AT MARKET HILL.
AT Market Hill, as well appears
By Chronicle of ancient Date,
There stood for many a hundred Years
A spacious Thorn before the Gate.
Hither came every Village Maid,
And on the Boughs her Garland hung,
And here, beneath the spreading Shade,
Secure from Satyrs sat and sung.
Sir Archibald Acheson, Secretary of State for Scotland.
Sir Archibald that val'rous Knight,
The Lord of all the fruitful Plain,
Would come and listen with Delight,
For he was fond of rural Strain.
(Sir Archibald whose favorite Name
Shall stand for Ages on Record,
By Scottish Bards of highest Fame,
Drummond of Hawthorden, and Sir William Alexander E. of Sterling, both famous
for their Poetry, who were Friends to Sir Archibald.
Wise Hawthorden and Sterline's Lord.)
But Time with Iron Teeth I ween
Has cankered all its Branches round;
No Fruit or Blossom to be seen,
Its Head reclining toward the Ground.
This aged, sickly sapless Thorn
Which must alas no longer stand;
Behold! the cruel Dean in Scorn
Cuts down with sacreligious Hand.
Dame Nature, when she saw the Blow,
Astonished gave a dreadful Shriek;
And Mother Tellus trembled so
She scarce recovered in a Week.
The Silvan Powers with Fear perplexed
In Prudence and Compassion sent
(For none could tell whose Turn was next)
Sad Omens of the dire Event.
The Magpye, lighting on the Stock,
Stood chatt'ring with incessant Din;
And with her Beak gave many a Knock
To rouse and warn the Nymph within.
The Owl foresaw in pensive Mood
The Ruin of her ancient Seat;
And fled in haste with all her Brood
To seek a more secure Retreat.
Last trolled forth a gentle Swine
To ease her Itch against the Stump,
And dismally was heard to whine
All as she scrubb'd her meazly Rump.
The Nymph who dwells in every Tree,
(If all be true that Poets chant)
Condemned by Fate's supreme Decree
Must die with her expiring Plant.
Thus, when the gentle Spina found
The Thorn committed to her Care,
Receive its last and deadly Wound,
She fled and vanished into Air.
But from the Root a dismal Groan
First issuing, struck the Murd'rers Ears;
And in a shrill revengeful Tone,
This Prophecy he trembling hears.
" Thou chief Contriver of my Fall,
" Relentless Dean! to Mischief born,
" My Kindred often thine Hide shall gall;
" Thy Gown and Cassock often be torn:
" And thy consed'rate Dame, who brags
" That she condemned me to the Fire,
" Shall rent her Petticoats to Rags,
" And wound her Legs with every Bry'r.
" Nor thou, Lord Sir Arthur Acheson.
Arthur, shall escape:
" To thee I often called in vain,
" Against that Assassin in Crape.
" Yet thou could tamely see me slain.
" Nor, when I felt the dreadful Blow,
" Or chid the Dean, or pinched thy Spouse,
" Since you could see me treated so,
" An old Retainer to your House.
" May that fell Dean, by whose Command
" Was formed this Machi'villian Plot,
" Not leave a Thistle on the Land;
" Then who will own thee for a Scot?
" Pigs and Fanatics, Cows, and Teagues
" Through all thy Empire I forsee,
" To tear thy Hedges join in Leagues,
" Sworn to revenge my Thorn and me.
" And thou, the Wretch ordained by Fate,
" Neal Gabagan, Hibernian Clown,
" With Hatchet blunter than thy Pate
" To hack my hallowed Timber down;
" When thou, suspended high in Air,
" Dy'st on a more ignoble Tree,
" (For thou shall steal thy Landlord's Mare)
" Then bloody Caitiff think on me.
A PASTORAL DIALOGUE.
DERMOT SHEELAH. A Nymph and Swain, Sheelah and Dermot hight,
Who wont to weed the Court of Gosford Knight.
While each with stubbed Knife removed the Roots
That raised between the Stones their daily Shoots;
As at their Work they sat in counterview,
With mutual Beauty smit, their Passion grew.
Sing heavenly Muse in sweetly flowing Strain,
The soft Endearments of the Nymph and Swain.

DERMOT. My Love to Sheelah is more firmly fixed:
Than strongest Weeds that grow these Stones betwixt:
My Spud these Nettles from the Stones can part,
No Knife so keen to weed thee from my Heart.

SHEELAH. My Love for gentle Dermot faster grows
Than yon tall Dock that rises to thy Nose.
Cut down the Dock, 'twill sprout again but O!
Love rooted out, again will never grow.

DERMOT. No more that Bry'r thy tender Legs shall rake
(I spare the Thistle for Sir Arthur's sake.)
Sharp are the Stones, take thou this rushy Matt;
The hardest Bum will bruise with sitting squat.

SHEELAH. Thy Breeches torn behind, stand gaping wide,
This Petticoat shall save thy dear Backside;
Nor need I blush, although you feel it wet;
Dermot, I vow, it is nothing else but sweat.

DERMOT. At an old stubborn Root I chanced to tug,
When the Dean threw me this Tobacco plug:
A longer half-p'orth never did I see;
This, dearest Sheelah, thou shall share with me.

SHEELAH. In at the Pantry door this Morn I slipped,
And from the Shelf a charming Crust I whipped;
Dennis was out, and I got hither safe;
And thou, my dear, shall have the bigger half.

DERMOT. When you saw Tady at long-bullets play,
You sat and lows'd him all the Sunshine Day.
How could you, Sheelah, listen to his Tales,
Or crak such Lice as his betwixt your Nails?

SHELAH. When you with Oonah stood behind a Ditch,
I peept, and saw you kiss the dirty Bitch.
Dermot, how could you touch those nasty Sluts!
I almost wished this Spud were in your Guts.

DERMOT. If Oonah once I kissed, forbear to chide:
Her Aunt's my Gossip by my Father's Side:
But, if I ever touch her Lips again,
May I be doomed for Life to weed in Rain.

SHEELAH. Dermot, I swear, though Tady's Locks could hold
Ten thousand Lice, and every Louse was gold,
Him on my Lap you never more should see;
Or may I lose my Weeding knife -- and Thee.

DERMOT. O, could I earn for thee, my lovely Lass,
A pair of Brogues to bear thee dry to Mass!
But see, where Norah with the Sowins comes --
Then let us rise, and rest our weary Bums.

Mary the Cook-Maid's LETTER TO Dr. SHERIDAN.
WELL; if ever I saw such another Man since my Mother bound my Head,
You a Gentleman! marry come up, I wonder where you were bred?
I am sure such Words does not become a Man of your Cloth,
I would not give such Language to a Dog, faith and troth.
Yes; you called my Master a Knave: Fie Mr. Sheridan, it is a Shame
For a Parson, who should know better Things, to come out with such a Name.
Knave in your Teeth, Mr. Sheridan, it is both a Shame and a Sin,
And the Dean my Master is an honester Man than you and all your kin:
He has more goodness in his little Finger, than you have in your whole Body,
My Master is a parsonable Man, and not a spindle-shank'd hoddy doddy.
And now whereby I find you would fain make an excuse,
Because my Master one Day in anger called you Goose.
Which, and I am sure I have been his Servant four Years since October,
And he never called me worse than Sweetheart drunk or sober:
Not that I know his Reverence was ever concerned to my knowledge,
Though you and your Come-rogues keep him out so late in your College.
You say you will eat Grass on his Grave: a Christian eat Grass!
Whereby you now confess your self to be a Goose or on Ass:
But that is as much as to say, that my Master should die before ye,
Well, well, that is as God pleases, and I don't believe that is a true Story,
And so say I told you so, and you may go tell my Master; what care I?
And I don't care who knows it, it is all one to Mary.
Every body knows, that I love to tell Truth and shame the Devil,
I am but a poor Servant, but I think Gentlefolks should be civil.
Besides, you found fault with our Vittles one Day that you was here,
I remember it was on a Tuesday, of all Days in the Year.
And Saunders the Man says, you are always jesting and mocking,
Mary said he (one Day, as I was mending my Master's Stocking,)
My Master is so fond of that Minister that keeps the School;
I thought my Master a wise Man, but that Man makes him a Fool.
Saunders said I, I would rather than a Quart of Ale,
He would come into our Kitchen, and I would pin a Dish-clout to his Tail.
And now I must go, and get Saunders to direct this Letter,
For I write but a sad Scrawl, but my Sister Marget she writes better.
Well, but I must run and make the Bed before my Master comes from Prayers,
And see now, it strikes ten, and I hear him coming up Stairs:
Whereof I could say more to your Verses, if I could write written hand,
And so I remain in a civil way, your Servant to command
A DIALOGUE Between Mad MULLINIX and TIMOTHY.
M. I Own it is not my Bread and Butter,
But prithee Tim, why all this Clutter?
Why ever in these raging Fits,
Damning to Hell the Jacobites?
When, if you search the Kingdom round,
There Is hardly twenty to be found;
No, not among the Priests and Friars.

T. 'Twixt you and me, G^ Damn the Liars.

M. The Tories are gone every Man over
To our Illustrious House of Hanover;
From all their Conduct this is plain;
And then --

T. G^ Damn the Liars again.
Did not an Earl but lately vote,
To bring in (I could cut his Throat)
Our whole Accounts of public Debts?

M. Lord, how this frothy Coxcomb frets!
aside.)
T. Did not an able Statesman-B^
This dangerous horrid Motion dish-up
As Popish Craft? Did he not rail on it?
Show Fire and Faggot in the Tail on it?
Proving the Earl a grand Offender,
And in a Plot for the Pretender?
Whose Fleet, it is all our Friends Opinion,
Was then embarking at Avignon.
These brangling Jars of Whig and Tory,
Are stale, and worn as Troy-Town Story.
The Wrong, it is certain, you were both in,
And now you find you fought for nothing.
Your Faction, when their Game was new,
Might want such noisy Fools as you;
But you, when all the Show is past,
Resolve to stand it out the last;
Like Martin Marral, gaping on,
Not minding when the Song is done.
When all the Bees are gone to settle,
You clatter still your Brazen Kettle.
The Leaders whom you listed under,
Have dropped their Arms, and seized the Plunder,
And when the War is past, you come
To rattle in their Ears your Drum:
And as that hateful hideous Grecian
Thersites (he was your Relation)
Was more abhorred and scorned by those
With whom he served, than by his Foes;
So thou art grown the Detestation
Of all thy Party through the Nation;
Thy peevish and perpetual Teazing,
With Plots, and Jacobites, and Treason;
Thy busy, never-meaning Face,
Thy screw'd-up Front, thy State grimace.
Thy formal Nods, important Sneers,
Thy Whisp'rings foisted in all Ears,
(Which are, whatever you may think,
But Nonsese wrapped up in a stink)
Have made thy Presence, in a true Sense,
To thy own Side so damned a Nuisance,
That when they have you in their Eye,
As if the Devil drove, they fly.

T. My good Friend Mullinix sorbear,
I vow to G^ you're too severe;
If it could ever yet be known,
I took Advice, except my own,
It should be yours: But, D^ my Blood,
I must pursue the public Good:
The Faction (is it not notorious?)
Keck at the Memory of Glorious:
It Is true, nor need I to be told,
My quondam Friends are grown so cold,
That scarce a Creature can be found,
To prance with me his Statue round.
The public Safety, I foresee,
Henceforth depends alone on me;
And while this vital Breath I blow,
Or from above, or from below,
I Will sputter, swagger, curse and rail,
The Tories Terror, Scourge, and Flail.

M. Tim, you mistake the Matter quite,
The Tories! you are their Delight;
And should you act a differens Part,
Be grave and wise -- 'twould break their Heart^
Why, Tim, you have a Taste I know,
And often see a Puppet-show;
Observe, the Audience is in Pain,
While Punch is hid behind the Scene:
But when they hear his rusty Voice,
With what Impatience they rejoice!
And then they value not two Straws,
How Solomon decides the Cause,
Which the true Mother, which Pretender;
Nor listen to the Witch of Endor;
Should Faustus, with the Devil behind him,
Enter the Stage, they never mind him;
If Punch, to spur their Fancy, shows
In at the Door his monstrous Nose,
Then sudden draws it back again;
O what a Pleasure mixed with Pain!
You every Moment think an Age,
'Till he appears upon the Stage;
And first his Bum you see him clap
Upon the Queen of Sheba's Lap:
The Duke of Lorrain drew his Sword,
Punch roaring ran, and running roared,
Reviled all People in his Jargon,
And sold the King of Spain a Bargain;
St. George himself he plays the Wag on,
And mounts astride upon the Dragon;
He gets a thousand Thumps and Kicks,
Yet cannot leave his roguish Tricks;
In every Action thrusts his Nose,
The Reason why, no Mortal knows;
In doleful Scenes that break our Heart,
Punch comes, like you, and lets a F^t.
There Is not a Puppet made of Wood,
But what would hang him if they could;
While teizing all, by all he is teased,
How well are the Spectators pleased!
Who in the Motion have no Share,
But purely come to hear and stare;
Have no Concern for Sabra's Sake,
Which gets the better, Saint or Snake,
Provided Punch (for there is the Jest)
Be foundly mawl'd, and plague the rest.
Thus, Tim, Philosophers suppose,
The World consists of Puppet-shows;
Where petulant conceited Fellows
Perform the Part of Punchinelloes;
So at this Booth which we call Dublin,
Tim, you are the Punch to stir up Trouble in;
You wriggle, fidge, and make a Rout,
Put all your Brother Puppets out,
Run on in a perpetual Round,
To teaze, perplex, disturb, confound,
Intrude with Monkey Grin and Clatter,
To interrupt all serious Matter,
Are grown the Nuisance of your Clan,
Who hate and scorn you to a Man;
But then, the Lookers-on, the Tories,
You still divert with merry Stories;
They would consent, that all the Crew
Were hanged, before they would part with you.
But tell me, Tim, upon the Spot,
By all this Coyl what have thou got?
If Tories must have all the Sport,
I fear you will be disgraced at Court.

T. Got? D^ my Blood, I frank my Letters,
Walk by my Place before my Betters,
And simple as I now stand here,
Expect in Time to be a P^
Got? D^ me, why I got my Will!
Never hold my Peace, and never stand still:
I f^t with twenty Ladies by;
They call me Beast, and what care I?
I bravely call the Tories, Jacks,
And Sons of Whores -- behind their Backs.
But could you bring me once to think,
That when I strut, and stare, and stink,
Revile, and slander, fume and storm,
Betray, make Oath, impeach, inform,
With such a constant loyal Zeal,
To serve my self and Commonweal,
And fret the Tories Souls to Death,
I did but lose my precious Breath,
And when I damn my Soul to plague 'em,
Am, as you tell me, but their May Game;
Consume my Vitals! they shall know,
I am not to be treated so;
I Would rather hang my self by half,
Than give those Rascals Cause to laugh.
But how, my Friend, can I endure,
Once so renowned, to live obscure?
No little Boys and Girls to cry
There Is nimble Tim a passing by.
No more my dear delightful Way tread,
Of keeping up a Party-Hatred.
Will none the Tory Dogs pursue,
When through the Streets I cry Hallooe?
Must all my D^mee's, Bloods, and Wounds,
Pass only now for empty Sounds?
Shall Tory Rascals be elected,
Although I swear them disaffected?
And when I roar, a Plot, a Plot,
Will our own Party mind me not?
So qualified to swear and lie,
Will they not trust me for a Spy?
Dear Mullinix, your good Advice
I beg, you see the Case is nice:
O, were I equal in Renown,
Like thee, to please this thankless Town!
Or blessed with such engaging Parts,
To win the truant Schoolboys Hearts!
Thy Virtues meet their just Reward,
Attended by the Sable Guard.
Charmed by thy Voice the 'Prentice drops
The Snow-ball destined at thy Chops.
Thy graceful Steps, and Col'nel's Air,
Allure the Cinder-picking Fair.

M. No more -- In Mark of true Affection,
I take thee under my Protection:
Thy Parts are good, it is not denied,
I wish they had been well applied.
But now observe my Counsel, ( viz.)
Adapt your Habit to your Phyz;
You must no longer thus equip ye,
As Horace says, optat Ephippia;
(There Is Latin too, that you may see
How much improved by Dr. (...))
I have a Coat at home, that you-may-try,
It Is just like this, which hangs by Geometry.
My Hat has much the nicer Air,
Your Block will fit it to a Hair:
That Wig, I would not for the World
Have it so formal, and so curled,
Twill be so oily and so sleek
When I have lain in it a Week!
You Will find it well prepared, to take
The Figure of Toupee or Snake.
Thus dressed alike from Top to Toe,
That which is which it is hard to know,
When first in Public we appear,
I Will lead the Van, keep you the Rear:
Be careful as you walk behind;
Use all the Talents of your Mind,
Be studious well to imitate
My portly Motion, Mein and Gate;
Mark my Address, and learn my Style,
When to look scornful, when to smile,
Nor sputter out your Oaths so fast,
But keep your Swearing to the last.
Then at your Leisure we'll be witty,
And in the Streets divert the City:
The Ladies from the Windows gaping,
The Children all our Motions aping.
Your Conversation to refine,
I Will take you to some Friends of mine,
Choice Spirits, who employ their Parts,
To mend the World by useful Arts;
Some cleansing hollow Tubes, to spy
Direct the Zenith of the Sky;
Some have the City in their Care,
From noxious Steams to purge the Air;
Some teach us in these dangerous Days,
How to walk upright in our Ways;
Some, whose reforming Hands engage,
To lash the Lewdness of the Age;
Some for the public Service go,
Perpetual Envoys to and fro;
Whose able Heads support the Weight
Of twenty M^rs of State:
We scorn, for Want of Talk, to jabber
Of Parties over our Bonny-Clabber:
Nor are we studious to enquire,
Who votes for Manours, who for Hire;
Our Care is to improve the Mind,
With what concerns all human Kind;
The various Scenes of mortal Life,
Who beats her Husband, who his Wife;
Or how the Bully at a Stroke
Knocked down the Boy, the Lanthorn broke.
One tells the Rise of Cheese and Oatmeal,
Another when he got a hot Meal;
One gives Advice in Proverbs old,
Instructs us how to tame a Scold;
Or how by Almanacks it is clear,
That Herrings will be cheap this Year;

T. Dear Mullinix, I now lament
My precious Time so long misspent,
By Nature meant for nobler Ends,
O, introduce me to your Friends!
For whom, by Birth, I was designed,
'Till Politics debased my Mind:
I give my self entire to you,
G^ d^ the Whigs and Tories too.

EPITAPH.
HERE continues to rot Pravity of his Manners, than successful in Accumulating
WEALTH.

For, without TRADE or PROFESSION,

He was the only Person of his Time, did, could not do.

Oh indignant reader!

Joannes jacet hic Mirandula -- caetera norunt
Et Tagus and Ganges -- forsan and Antipodes.
Applied to F. C.

HEre Francis Ch^s lies -- Be civil!
The rest God knows -- perhaps the Devil.
EPIGRAM.
PEter complains, that God has given
To his poor Babe a Life so short:
Consider Peter, he is in Heaven;
It Is good to have a Friend at Court.
Another.
YOU beat your Pate, and fancy Wit will come:
Knock as you please, there is no body at home.
EPITAPH [ of By Words.]
HERE lies a round Woman, who thought mighty odd
Every Word she ever heard in this Church about God.
To convince her of God the good Dean did endeavor,
But still in her Heart she held Nature more clever.
Though he talked much of Virtue, her Head always run
Upon something or other, she found better Fun,
For the Dame, by her Skill in Affairs Astronomical,
Imagined, to live in the Clouds but was comical.
In this World, she despised every Soul she met here,
And now she is in the other, she thinks it but Queer.
EPIGRAM.
On seeing a worthy Prelate go out of Church in the Time of Divine Service, to
wait on his Grace the D. of D......
LORD Pam in the Church (could you think it) kneeled down,
When told the Lieutenant was just come to Town,
His Station despising, unawed by the Place,
He flies from his God, to attend on his Grace:
To the Court it was fitter to pay his Devotion,
Since God had no Hand in his Lordship's Promotion.
EPIGRAM from the FRENCH.
SIR, I admit your general Rule
That every Poet is a Fool:
But you yourself may serve to show it,
That every Fool is not a Poet.
EPITAPH.
WELL then, poor G^ lies under ground!
So there is an end of honest Jack.
So little Justice here he found,
It Is ten to one he will never come back.
EPIGRAM. On the Toasts of the Kit-Cat club, Anno 1716.
WHence deathless Kit-Cat took its Name,
Few Critics can unriddle;
Some say from Pastry Cook it came,
And some from Cat and Fiddle,
From no trim Beau's its Name it boasts,
Gray Statesman, or green Wits;
But from this Pell-mell-Pack of Toasts,
Of old Cats and young Kits.
To a LADY with the Temple of Fame.
What Is Fame with Men, by Custom of the Nation,
Is called in Women only Reputation:
About them both why keep we such a pother?
Part you with one, and I Will renounce the other.
VERSES
To be placed under the Picture of England's Arch-Poet: Containing a complete
Catalogue of his Works.
SEE who never was or will be half read!
Who first sung Two Heroic Poems in Folio, twenty Boooks,
Arthur, then sung Heroic Poem in twelve Books.
Alfred,
Praised great Heroic Poem in Folio, ten Books.
Eliza in God's anger,
Till all true Englishmen cried, hang her!
Made William's Virtues wipe the bare A^
And hanged up Malborough in Instructions to Vanderbank a Tapestry-Weaver,
Arras:
Then hissed from Earth, grew Heavenly quite;
Made every Reader curse the Hymn to the Light.
Light;
Mauled human Wit in one thick Satyr against Wit.
Satyr,
Next in three Books, sunk Of the Nature of Man.
human Nature,
Un-did Creation, a Poem in seven Books.
Creation at a Jerk,
And of The Redeemer, another Heroic Poem in six Books.
Redemption made damned Work
Then took his Muse at once, and dipped her
Full in the middle of the Scripture.
What Wonders there the Man grown old, did?
Sternhold himself he out-Sternholded,
Made Translation of all the Psalms.
David seem so mad and freakish,
All thought him just what thought King Achiz.
No Mortal read his Canticles and Ecclesiast.
Solomon,
But judged Roboam his own Son.
Moses Paraphrase of the Canticles of Moses and Deborah, etc.
he served as Moses Pharaoh,
And Deborah, as She Sise-rah:
Made The Lamentations.
Jeremy full sore to cry,
And The whole Book of Job, a Poem in Folio.
Job himself curse God and die.
What Punishment all this must follow?
Shall Arthur use him like King Tollo?
Shall David as Uriah slay him?
Or dext'rous Deb'rah Sisera-him?
Or shall Eliza lay a Plot,
To treat him like her Sister Scot?
Shall William dub his better End Kick him on the Breech, not Knight him on the
Shoulder.

Or Marlb'rough serve him like a Friend?
No, none of these -- Heaven spare his Life!
But send him, honest Job, thy Wife.
Dr. Sw^ to Mr. P^e, While he was writing the Dunciad.
POpe has the Talent well to speak,
But not to reach the Ear;
His loudest Voice is low and weak,
The Dean too deaf to hear.
A while they on each other look,
Then diff^'rent Studies choose,
The Dean sits plodding on a Book,
Pope walks, and courts the Muse.
Now Backs of Letters, though designed
For those who more will need 'em,
Are filled with Hints, and interlin'd,
Himself can hardly read 'em.
Each Atom by some other struck,
All Turns and Motion tries:
Till in a Lump together stuck,
Behold a Poem rise!
Yet to the Dean his Share allot;
He claims it by a Canon;
That, without which a Thing is not
Is, causa sine qua non.
Thus, Pope, in vain you boast your Wit;
For, had our deaf Divine
Been for your Conversation fit,
You had not writ a Line.
Of Prelate thus, for preaching famed,
The Sexton reasoned well,
And justly half the Merit claimed
Because he rang the Bell.
BOUNCE TO FOP.
An Epistle from a Dog at Twickenham to a Dog at Court.
TO thee sweet Fop, these Lines I send,
Who, though no Spaniel, am a Friend.
Tho, once my Tail in wanton play,
Now frisking this and then that way,
Chanced, with a Touch of just the Tip,
To hurt your Lady-lap-dog-ship;
Yet thence to think I Would bite your Head off!
Sure Bounce is one you never read of.
FOP! you can dance, and make a Leg,
Can fetch and carry, cringe and beg,
And (what is the Top of all your Tricks)
Can stoop to pick up Strings and Sticks.
We Country Dogs love nobler Sport,
And scorn the Pranks of Dogs at Court.
Fie, naughty Fop! where ever you come
To f^t and p^ss about the Room,
To lay your Head in every Lap,
And, when they think not of you -- snap!
The worst that Envy, or that Spite
Ever said of me, is, I can bite:
That idle Gypsies, Rogues in Rags,
Who poke at me, can make no Brags;
And that to towze such Things as flutter,
To honest Bounce is Bread and Butter.
While you, and every courtly Fop,
Fawn on the Devil for a Chop,
I Have the Humanity to hate
A Butcher, though he brings me Meat;
And let me tell you, have a Nose,
(Whatever stinking Fops suppose)
That under Cloth of Gold or Tissue,
Can smell a Plaster, or an Isiue.
Your pilf'ring Lord, with simple Pride,
May wear a Pick-lock at his Side;
My Master wants no Key of State,
For Bounce can keep his House and Gate.
When all such Dogs have had their Days,
As knavish Pams, and fawning Trays;
When pampered Cupids, beastly Veni's,
And motly, squinting Harlequini's, Alii legunt Harvequini's.

Shall lick no more their Lady's Br^,
But die of Looseness, Claps, or Itch;
Fair Thames from either ecchoing Shore
Shall hear, and dread my manly Roar.
See Bounce, like Berecynthia, crowned
With thundering Offspring all around,
Beneath, beside me, and a top,
A hundred Sons! and not one Fop.
Before my Children set your Beef,
Not one true Bounce will be a Thief;
Not one without Permission feed,
(Though some of J^n's hungry Breed)
But whatsoever the Father's Race,
From me they suck a little Grace.
While your fine Whelps learn all to steal,
Bred up by Hand on Chick and Veal.
My Eldest-born resides not far,
Where shines great Strafford's glittering Star:
My second (Child of Fortune!) waits
At Burlington's Palladian Gates:
A third majestically stalks
(Happiest of Dogs!) in Cobham's Walks:
One ushers Friends to Bathurst's Door;
One fawns, at Oxford's, on the Poor.
Nobles, whom Arms or Arts adorn,
Wait for my Infants yet unborn.
None but a Peer of Wit and Grace,
Can hope a Puppy of my Race.
And O! would Fate the Bliss decree
To mine (a Bliss too great for me)
That two, my tallest Sons, might grace
Attending each with stately Pace,
Iulus' Side, as erst Evander's, Virg. Aen. S.

To keep off Flatt'rers, Spies, and Panders,
To let no noble Slave come near,
And scare Lord Fannys from his Ear:
Then might a Royal Youth, and true,
Enjoy at least a Friend -- or two:
A Treasure, which, of Royal kind,
Few but Himself deserve to find.
Then Bounce ('it is all that Bounce can crave)
Shall wag her Tail within the Grave.
On the Countess of B^ cutting Paper.
PAllas grew vap'rish once and odd,
She would not do the least right thing,
Either for Goddess or for God,
Nor work, nor play, nor paint, nor sing.
Jove frowned, and "Use (he cried) those Eyes
" So skilful, and those Hands so taper;
" Do something exquisite, and wise --
She bowed, obeyed him and cut Paper.
This vexing him who gave her Birth,
Thought by all Heaven a burning Shame,
What does she next, but bids on Earth
Her B^l^n do just the same.
Pallas you give yourself strange Airs;
But sure you will find it hard to spoil
The Sense and Taste of one that bears
The Name of Savil and of Boil.
Alas! one bad Example shown,
How quickly all the Sex pursue!
See Madam! see, the Arts overthrown,
Between John Overton and You
On a certain Lady at Court.
I Know the thing that is most uncommon;
(Envy be silent, and attend!)
I know a Reasonable Woman,
Handsome and witty, yet a Friend.
Not warped by Passion, awed by Rumor,
Not grave through Pride, or gay through Folly,
An equal Mixture of good Humor,
And sensible soft Melancholy.
" Has she no Faults then (Envy says) Sir?"
Yes she has one, I must aver:
When all the World conspires to praise her,
The Woman's deaf, and does not hear.
A SOLDIER AND A SCHOLAR: OR, A Lady's Judgment on those two Characters.
THUS spoke to my Lady the Knight full of Care,
Let me have your Advice in a weighty Affair:
This Hamilton's Bawn, while it sticks on my Hand,
I lose by the House what I get by the Land;
But how to dispose of it to the best Bidder,
For a Barrack, or Malt-house, we now must consider:
First, let me suppose, I make it a Malt-house,
Here, I have computed the Profit will fall t'us;
There Is nine hundred Pounds for Labor and Grain;
I increase it to Twelve; so Three hundred remain;
A handsome Addition for Wine and good Cheer,
Three Dishes a Day, and ten Hogsheads a Year;
With a Dozen large Vessels my Vaules shall be stored;
No little scrub Joint shall ever come on my Board;
And you, and the Dean, no more shall combine,
To stint me at Night to one Bottle of Wine:
Nor shall I, for his Humors, permit you to purloin
A Stone and a half of good Beef from my Surloin.
If I make it a Barrack, the Crown is my Tenant;
My Dear, I have pondered again, and again on it.
In Poundage and Drawback, I lose half my Rent,
Whatever they give me, I must be content,
Or join with the Court in every Debate;
And rather than that, I would lose my Estate.
Thus ended the Knight: Thus began the meek Wife:
It must, and it shall be a Barrack, my Life:
I am grown a mere Mopus, no Company comes,
But a Rabble of Tenants, and rusty dull Rums;
With Parsons, what Lady can keep her self clean?
I am all over daubed, when I sit by the Dean of St. Patrick's
Dean.
But if you will give us a Barrack, my Dear,
The Captain, I Am sure, will always come here.
I then shall not value his Deanship a Straw;
For the Captain, I Will warrant, will keep him in Awe.
Or should he pretend to be brisk and alert,
We'll tell him that Chaplains should not be so pert;
That Men of his Coat should be minding their Prayers,
And not among Ladies to give themselves Airs.
Thus argued my Lady, but argued in vain;
The Knight his Opinion resolved to maintain.
But Hannah, who listened to all that was past,
And could not endure so vulgar a Taste,
As soon as her Ladyship called to be dressed,
Cried, Madam, why surely my Master's possessed;
Sir Arthur the Malster! how fine it would Sound?
I Would rather the Bawn were funk under Ground:
But, Madam, I guessed there would never come Good,
When I saw him so often with Sir A^ A^'s Receiver, and one of his Tenants.
Darby and Wood,
And now my Dream's out; for I was a-dream'd,
That I saw a huge Rat; O dear, how I scream'd!
And after, methought, I lost my new Shoes,
And Molly, she said, I should hear some ill News.
Dear Madam, had you but the Spirit to teaze,
You might have a Barrack whenever you please,
And, Madam, I always believed you so stout,
That for twenty Denials, you would not give out.
If I had a Husband like him, I protest,
Till he gave me my Will, I would give him no Rest,
And rather than come in the same Pair of Sheets
With such a cross Man, I would lie in the Streets.
But, Madam, I beg, you will contrive, and invent,
And worry him out, till he gives his Consent.
Dear Madam, whenever on a Barrack I think,
An I were to be hanged, I cannot sleep a Wink,
(For if a new Crotchet comes into my Brain,
I cannot get it out though I Would never so fain.)
I fancy already, a Barrack contrived
At Hamilton's Bawn, and the Troop is arrived:
Of this, to be sure, Sir Arthur has warning,
And waits on the Captain betimes in the Morning.
Now see when they meet, how their Honors behave --
Noble Captain, your Servant -- Sir Arthur your Slave.
You honor me much -- The Honor is mine.
'Twas a sad rainy Night -- But the Morning is fine.
Pray how does my Lady? -- My Wife's at your Service.
I think I have seen her Picture at Jervais'.
Good Morrow, good Captain -- I Will wait on you down.
You shall not stir a Foot -- You Will think me a Clown.
For all the World, Captain, not half an Inch farther --
You must be obeyed; your Servant, Sir Arthur.
My humble Respects to my Lady unknown --
I hope you will use my House as your own.
" Go bring me my Smock, and leave off your Prate,
" Thou have certainly gotten a Cup in thy Pate.
Pray, Madam be quiet, what was it I said;
You had like to have put it quite out of my Head.
Next day, to be sure, the Captain will come,
At the Head of his Troop, with his Trumpet and Drum:
Now, Madam, observe how he marches in State,
The Man with the Kettle-Drum enters the Gate,
Dub, dub, a dub, dub; the Trumpeters follow,
Tantara, Tantara; while all the Boys halloo.
See, now comes the Captain, all daubed with Gold Lace:
O law! the sweet Gentleman, look in his Face!
And see how he rides like a Lord of the Land,
And the fine Flaming-Sword he holds in his Hand!
And his Horse, the dear Creature, it prances and rears,
With Ribbands in Knots, at his Tail and his Ears.
At last comes the Troop at the Word of Command,
Drawn up in our Court, 'till the Captain cries, Stand.
Your Ladyship lifts up the Sash to be seen,
(For sure I had dizen'd you out like a Queen)
The Captain, to show he is proud of the Favor,
Looks up to the Window, and cocks up his Beaver.
His Beaver is cockt, pray, Madam, mind that;
(For a Captain of Horse never takes off his Hat;
Because he has never a Hand that is idle,
For the Right holds the Sword, and the Left holds the Bridle.
Then he flourishes thrice his Sword, in the Air,
As a Compliment due to a Lady so fair:
(How I tremblo to think of the Blood it has spilt!
Then he lowers the Point; then he kisses the Hilt.
Your Ladyship smiles, and thus you begin:
" Pray, Captain, be pleased to alight, and walk in.
The Captain salutes you, with Congee profound;
And your Ladyship curtsies halfway to the Ground.
" Kit, run for your Master, and bid him come to us;
" I Am sure he will be proud of the Honor you do us:
" And, Captain, you will do us the Favor to stay
" And take a short Dinner here with us to day,
" You're heartily welcome; but as for good Cheer,
" You are come in the very worst Time of the Year.
" Had I but expected so worthy a Guest --
Lord, Madam, your Ladyship sure is in Jest:
You banter me, Madam, the Kingdom must grant --
" You Officers, Captain, are so complaisant.
" Hist, Hussy, I think I hear Somebody coming --
No, Madam, it is only Sir Arthur a humming.
To shorten my Tale, (for I hate a long Story)
The Captain, at Dinner, appears in his Glory.
The Dr. Swift.
Dean and the Dr. Jenny.
Doctor have humbled their Pride;
For the Captain's entreated to sit by your Side.
And because he is their Betters, you carve for him first;
The Parsons, for Envy, are ready to burst.
The Servants amazed are scarce ever able
To keep off their Eyes as he sits at the Table.
And Molly and I have thrust in our Nose,
To peep at the Captain, in all his fine Clothes.
Dear, Madam, 'be sure, he is a fine-spoken Man;
Do but hear, on the Clergy, how glib his Tongue ran.
" And, Madam, said he if such Dinners you give,
" You Will never want Parsons as long as you live;
" I never knew a Parson without a good Nose;
" But the Devil's as welcome, wherever he goes.
" G^ d^ me, they bid us reform and repent;
" But, Z^ds, by their Looks, they never keep Lent.
" Mr. Curate, for all your grave Looks, I Am afraid,
" You cast a Sheep's Eye on her Ladyship's Maid:
" I wish she would lend you her lilly-white Hand,
" In mending your Gown, and smoothing your Band.
(" For the Dean was so shabby, and looked like a Ninny,
" That the Captain supposed he was Curate to Jenny.)
" Whenever you see a Cassock and Gown,
" An hundred to one but it covers a Clown.
" Observe how a Parson comes into a Room:
" G^ d^ me, he hobbles as bad as my Groom,
" A Scholar, when just from the College broke loose,
" Can hardly tell how to cry Bo to a Goose.
" Your Novids, and Bluturks, and Omers, and Stuff;
" By G^, they don't signify this Pinch of Snuff.
" To give a young Gentleman right Education,
" The Army's the very best School in the Nation.
" My Schoolmaster called me a Dunce and a Fool;
" But at Cuffs, I was always the Cock of the School.
" I never could take to my Books for the Blood of me.
" And the Puppy consest, he expected no Good of me.
" Now, Madam you will think it a strange thing to say,
" But the Sight of a Book makes me sick to this Day.
Never since I was born, did I hear so much Wit;
And, Madam, I laughed, till I thought I should split.
So then you looked scornful, and sniff'd at the Dean:
As who should say, "Now am I skinny and lean?
But he durst not so much as once open his Lips:
And the Doctor was plaguily down in the Hips.
Thus merciless Hannah run on in her Talk,
Till she heard the Dean call, "Will your Ladyship walk?
Her Ladyship answers -- I Am just coming down.
Then turning to Hannah, and forcing a Frown,
(Although it was plain, in her Heart she was glad;)
Ory'd, Hussy, why sure, the Wench is gone mad:
How could these Chimera's get into your Brains?
Come hither, and take this old Gown for your Pains.
But the Dean if this Secret should get to his Ears,
Will never have done with his Jibes and his Jeers.
For your Life, not a Word of this Matter I charge you;
Give me but a Barrack, a Fig for the Clergy.
TO Doctor D^L^Y ON THE LIBELS Writ against him.
AS some raw Youth in Country bred,
To Arms by Thirst of Honor led,
When at a Skirmish first he hears
The Bullets whistling round his Ears,
Will duck his Head aside, will start,
And feel a trembling at his Heart:
Till, 'scaping often without a Wound
Lessens the Terror of the Sound:
Fly Bullets now as thick as Hops,
He runs into a Cannon's Chops.
An Author thus who pants for Fame
Begins the World with Fear and Shame,
When first in Print, you see him dread
Each Pot-gun levelled at his Head:
The Lead yon Critick's Quill contains,
Is destined to beat out his Brains.
As if he heard loud Thunders roll,
Cries, Lord have Mercy on his Soul,
Concluding, that another Shot
Will strike him dead upon the Spot.
But, when with squibbing, flashing, popping,
He cannot see one Creature dropping:
That, missing Fire, or missing Aim,
His Life is safe, I mean his Fame,
The Danger past, takes Heart of Grace,
And looks a Critic in the Face.
Though Splendour gives the fairest Mark
To poisoned Arrows (...) the Dark,
Yet, In seipso totus teres atque rotundus.
in your self when smooth and round,
They glance aside without a Wound.
It Is said the Gods tried all their Art,
How, Pain they might from Pleasure part;
But little could their Strength avail,
Both still are fast'ned by the Tail.
Thus, Fame and Censure with a Tether
By Fate are always linked together.
Why will you aim to be preferred,
In Wit before the common Herd?
And yet, grow mortified and vexed,
To pay the Penalty annexed.
It Is Eminence makes Envy rise,
As fairest Fruits attract the Flies.
Should stupid Libels grieve your Mind,
You soon a Remedy may find:
Lie down obscure like other Folks
Below the Lash of Snarlers Jokes.
Their Faction is five hundred odds,
For, every Coxcomb lends them Rods;
And sneers as learnedly as they,
Like Females over their Morning Tea.
You say, the Muse will not contain,
And write you must, or break a Vein:
Then, if you find the Terms too hard,
No longer my Advice regard:
But raise your Fancy on the Wing;
The Irish Senate's Praises sing:
How jealous of the Nation's Freedom,
And, for Corruptions, how they weed 'em;
How each the Public Good pursues,
How far their Hearts from private Views;
Make all true Patriots up to Shoe-boys
Huzza their Brethren at the Blue-boys.
And dread no more the Rage of Grub;
You then may soon be of the Club.
How often am I for Rhyme to seek?
To dress a Thought, I toil a Week:
And then, how thankful to the Town,
If all my Pains will earn a Crown.
Whilst, every Critic can devour
My Work and me in half an Hour.
Would Men of Genius cease to write,
The Rogues must die for Want of Spite,
Must die for Want of Food and Raiment,
If Scandal did not find them Payment.
How cheerfully the Hawkers cry
A Satire, and the Gentry buy!
While my hard-labour'd Poem pines
Unsold upon the Printer's Lines.
A Genius in the Reverend Gown
Must ever keep its Owner down:
It Is an unnatural Conjunction,
And spoils the Credit of the Function.
Round all your Brethren cast your Eyes;
Point out the surest Men to rise:
That Club of Candidates in Black,
The least deserving of the Pack,
Aspiring, factious, fierce and loud,
With Grace and Learning unendow'd,
Will sooner coin a Thousand Lies
Than suffer Men of Parts to rise:
They crowd about Preferment's Gate,
And press you down with all their Weight.
For, as of old, Mathematicans
Were by the Vulgar thought Magicians;
So Academick dull Ale-drinkers
Pronounce all Men of Wit, Free-thinkers.
Wit, as the chief of Virtue's Friends,
Disdains to serve ignoble Ends.
Observe what Loads of stupid Rhimes
Oppress us in corrupted Times:
What Pamphlets in a Court's Defense
Show Reason, Grammar, Truth, or Sense?
For, though the Muse delights in Fiction,
She never inspires against Conviction.
Then keep your Virtue still unmixt,
And let not Faction come betwixt.
By Party steps no Grandeur clime at,
Though it would make you England's Primate:
First learn the Science to be dull,
You then may soon your Conscience lull;
If not, however seated high,
Your Genius in your Face will fly.^
When Jove was, from his teeming Head,
Of Wit's fair Goodness brought to Bed,
There followed at his Lying-in
For Afterbirth a Sooterkin;
Which, as the Nurse pursued to kill,
Attained by Flight the Muses Hill;
There in the Soil began to root,
And litter'd at Parnassus' Foot.
From hence the Critic Vermin sprung
With Harpy Claws, and Poisonous Tongue.
Who fatten on Poetic Scraps,
Too cunuing to be caught in Traps.
Dame Nature, as the Learned show,
Provides each Animal its Foe:
Hounds hunts the Hare, the wily Fox
Devours your Geese, the Wolf your Flocks;
Thus Envy pleads a natural Claim
To persecute the Muses Fame;
On Poets in all Times abusive,
From Homer down to Pope inclusive.
Yet, what avails it to complain?
You try to take Revenge in vain.
A Rat your utmost Rage defies
That safe behind the Wainscot lies:
Say, did you ever know by Sight
In Cheese an individual Mite?
Show me the same numerick Flea,
That bit your Neck but yesterday.
You then may boldly go in Quest
To find the Grubstreet Poet's Nest.
What Spunging-House in dread of Jayl
Receives them while they wait for Bayl:
What Ally they are neftled in,
To flourish over a Cup of Ginn:
Find the last Garrat where they lay,
Or Cellar, where they starve to Day.
Suppose you had them all trepanned
With each a Libel in his Hand,
What Punishment would you inflict?
Or call 'em Rogues or get 'em kicked?
These they have often tried before;
You but oblige 'em so much more:
Themselves would be the first to tell,
To make their Trash the better sell.
You have been Libel'd -- Let us know
What senseless Coxcomb told you so.
Will you regard the Hawker's Cries
Who in his Titles always lies?
Whatever the noisy Scoundrel says
It might be something in your Praise:
And, Praise bestowed in Grub-street Rhimes,
Would vex one more a thousand Times.
Till Block-heads blame, and Judges praise,
The Poet cannot claim his Bays.
On me, when Dunces are satyrick,
I take it for a Penegyrick.
Hated by Fools, and Fools to hate,
Be that my Motto, and my Fate.
FINIS.
BOOKS printed for BENJAMIN MOTTE, at the Middle Temple-Gate Fleetstreet.
TRAVELS into several Remote Nations of the World; In four Parts. By Lemuel
Gulliver, First a Surgeon, and then a Captain of several Ships, 2 Vols. 12 mo.
A Tale of a Tub, written for the universal Improvement of Mankind. To which is
added, an Account of a Battle between the Ancient and Modern Books in St.
James's Library. The Eighth Edition. With the Author's Apology and Explanatory
Notes, by W. W-tt-n, B. D. and others. Hudibrass. In three Parts. Written in
the Time of the late Wars. Corrected and Amended, with Additions. To which are
added, Annotations, and an exact Index to the Whole. Adorned with a new Set of
Cuts designed and engraved by Mr. Hogarth. A Dissertation on Reading the
Classicks, and forming a just Style. Written in the Year 1709. and addressed to
the Right Honorable John Lord Roos, the present Duke of Rutland. By Henry
Felton, D. D. Principal of Edmund Hall, Oxon, and Chaplain to his Grace the
Duke of Rutland. The Fourth Edition, with some Alterations and Additions.
Essays upon several Moral Subjects. In four Parts. By Jeremy Collier, M. A.

