AN ACCOUNT OF THE ANCIENT DIVISION OF THE ENGLISH NATION into Hundreds and
Tithings: The happy effects of that excellent institution; -- that it would be
equally beneficial to all other Nations and Countries, as well under
monarchical as republican establishments; -- and that, to the English Nation in
particular, it would afford an effectual means of reforming the Corruption of
Parliaments by rendering the Representation of the People perfectly equal, in
exact numerical Proportion, to the total Number of Householders throughout the
whole Realm.

Intended as an Appendix to several Tracts on National Defense, etc.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

LONDON: Printed by GALABIN and BAKER, INGRAM-COURT, FENCHURCH-STREET.
M.DCC.LXXXIV.

THE First Division of this Kingdom into Hundreds and Tithings was ordained by
the virtuous and patriotic King Alfred, See Mr. Lambard's explication of words
prefixed to his Archaionomia, on the word Centuria.
who is expressly said to have therein followed the prudent Council given by
Jethro to Moses, The 1st Establishment of this prudent advice of Jethro I have
examined more at large in my Tract on "the Law of Nature and Principles of
Action in Man," p. 325 to 329. Wherein I have shown the Right of the People to
ELECT Judges and Officers, Civil as well as Military, (Religious Officers and
Ministers excepted,) from the Colonel, or Captain, of a Thousand, (who was also
a justiciary,) down to the Sergeant (Decurio) or Tithingman; (Deuteronomy. i. 9-17.)
all which Officers were elected and nominated by the people before they were
invested with Authority by Moses. This Right of the People to ELECT Judges and
Officers is clearly confirmed by a parallel Text in the same Book. Chap. xvi.
18. -- JUDGES and OFFICERS shall thou make thee in all thy Gates, which the
Lord thy God gives thee, throughout thy Tribes, and they shall judge the
People with just Judgment. When this is rendered literally according to the
Original, the popular Right of Election appears still more manifest. -- Judges
and Officers shall thou give to thyself, ((...)) which could no otherwise be
than by a free Election in all their Gates, (i. e. the Gates of their Cities,
where the public Courts were anciently held,) for the Judges and Officers to
each Tribe respectively. -- Let us be truly thankful to God for the Justice of
his Laws, and let us pray that we may have Grace to adopt them! As far as the
nature of our political Establishments will legally permit, let us, for the
honor of Human Nature, imitate the glorious State of Political Liberty with
which God was pleased to bless his people ISRAEL; and in which he would, most
certainly, have maintained them, if they had persevered in the right Faith, and
in due obedience to his Laws! But, when men forsake GOD, they unavoidably lose
their LIBERTY! Let no man conceive that the Rights of Election, which I have
proved by Scripture, were the Rights only of a single Nation, the People of
Israel; on the contrary, let us remember, that, as all Nations under the
Christian Dispensation, or rather all Nations that are really Christians, are
said to be engrafted on the Israelitish Olive Tree, and are thereby entitled to
the name of ISRAEL, so they are undoubtedly entitled likewise to all the
immunities and privileges of redeemed Israel: for, the only people, perhaps,
that are judicially excluded from those national Rights, are the Branches which
were broken off from that good Olive Tree for their unbelief, i. e. the Jews
themselves, who are broken off, indeed, for a time, (a long time, alas, it has
now been!) and are dispersed or strewed (like Dead Branches separated from
their proper Root) amongst all the nations of the Earth; thus universally
exhibiting, as it were, a monumental Proof of the Scripture Testimonies against
that peculiar Nation!

But, under the Christian Dispensation, there is not only the same reason for
claiming to the people the Israelitish privilege of electing all temporal
JUDGES and OFFICERS; but there are also unquestionable Proofs that the elective
Rights of Christian People are enlarged still farther to the choice of all
their Spiritual Officers; and Ministers; whereas, even in Israel, all Spiritual
Functions were hereditary and not elective.

Thus are the Elective Rights of Christian People exceedingly enlarged; and all
persons, who withhold or oppose these just Rights, ought to beware lest they be
found at last amongst the Enemies of the King of Righteousness; for it is
remarkable that the great apostasy, so long foretold in the Christian Church,
could not manifest itself in power until the unwearied encroachments and
usurpations of Popes, Emperors, and Kings, had withdrawn from the Church (i. e.
the Congregation of Clergy and People in each Country or District) that most
essential Right of all others, the ancient usage of electing their own Bishops!
See a long Note on this Subject beginning at p. 331 of my Tract on the Law of
Retribution.


for the more commodious Government of the Israelitish Commonwealth; it being,
indeed, an Institution thoroughly consistent with the most perfect state of
Liberty that Human Nature is capable of enjoying, and yet competent
nevertheless to fulfill all the necessary purposes of mutual Defense, the due
Execution of all just and equal Laws, and the sure maintenance of the public
peace. Wonderful Fruits of Utility would this one Council of Alfred (or rather
of Jethro) produce to the Commonwealth (says the loyal Mr. Lambard) if we
would no longer use the shadow, but hold the substantial form of the true
Tithing Mirabiles illud unum Aluredi (vel potius Jethronis) concilium allaturum
Reipublicae utilitatis fructus, si verae Decuriae solidam teneremus imaginem,
nec amplius umbra uteremur. Lambard on the word Decuria, or Tithing.
In the Laws of King Edward the Confessor this mode of national Defense, by
free popular Societies of Armed Citizens in every District and Vicinage, is
called "Summa et maxima Securitas," etc. Cap. 20. De Friborgis.

Praeterea est quaedam summa and maxima Securitas per quam omnes statu
firmissimo sustinentur, videlicet, ut unusquisque stabiliat se sub
fideiussionis securitate quam Angli vocant Freoborhges, soli tamen Eboracenses
dicunt eandem Tienmannatala, quod sonat latin december hominum numerum. Haec
securitas hoc modo fiebat, scilicet, quod de omnibus villis totius regni sub
decennali fideiussione debebant esse universi: Ita quod si vnus ex december
forisfecerit, novem ad rectum eum haberent: quod si aufugeret, daretur lege
terminus ei. xxxi. dierum: quesitus interim and inventus, ad justitiam regis
adduceretur. Et de suo illico restauraret damnum quod fecerat. Et si ad hoc
FORISFACERET, de corpore suo iustitia sieret. Sed si infra predictum terminum
inveniri non posset, quia in OMNIFRIBORCO unus erat capitalis quem vocabant,
Friborgesheofod, ipse capitalis sumeret duos de melioribus SUI FRIBORGI, et de
tribus FRIBORGIS sibi propinquioribus acciperet de unoquoque capitalem and duos
de melioribus uniuscujusque FRIBORGI si posset habere, and ita se DUODECIMO
EXISTENTE purgaret se and FRIBORGUM SUUM (si facere posset) de forisfacto and
fuga supradicti malefactoris. Quod si facere non posset, ipse cum FRIBORGO SUO
damnum restauraret de proprio malefactoris quamdiu duraret, quo deficiente de
suo and FRIBORGI SUI perficeret, and erga iustitiam emendaret, secundum quod
legaliter eis judicatum fuisset. Tandem vero sacramentum quod non potuerunt
adimplere per tres friborgos sibi viciniores per se ipsos jurarent, sese
nullatenus fore culpabiles, and si quando possent eum recuperare adducerent ad
justitiam, aut justitiae dicerent ubi esset.


the Chief and greatest Security by which all men are sustained in the firmest
State, viz. that every one (unusquisque) should establish himself under the
Security of a Covenant (or Suretyship) "which the English call Freoborhges,"
(i. e. free pledges,) but the Yorkshiremen alone call Tienmannatela, which,
expressed in the Latin Tongue, is December Hominum numerum, (the number of 10
Men.) This Security was constituted in the following manner, viz. that ALL
PERSONS (UNIVERSI) of all the Towns of the whole Kingdom ought to be under a
Decenal Suretyship: so that if one of the Ten should FORFEIT [viz. forfeit his
Freepledge -- i. e. his Credit in that little Community as an honest and legal
Member of it, probus et legalis, (see Magna Charta,) by which estimation alone
his Neighbors could so far confide in him as to admit him into their Tithing,
and had a right to expect from him a return of mutual security] the nine should
have him to (trial of) "RIGHT," (or indict him,) but, if he should abscond, a
term in Law of 31 Days should be allowed him: being sought in the mean while
and found, he should be brought to the King's Judgment, (i. e. to Judgment or
Justice in the King's Courts,) "and there, out of his own" (property,) should
make good whatever damage he had done. And, if to this he had forfeited, (or
failed,) Justice should be done of his body. But if, within the aforesaid term
he could not be found, the Chief, or Head, for in every Freeborough (or
Tithing) there was one Chief whom they called Freeborough Head, (Freoborges
Heofod i. e. Head-borough or Tithingman,) should take 2 of the better sort of
people of his Freeborough, and also, out of the 3 nearest Freeboroughs, he
should take of each one Chief and 2 of the better sort of people if he can have
them; and so, the 12 being convened, he shall clear himself and his Freeborough
(if he can do it) of the forfeiture and slight of the aforesaid Malefactor.
Which if he could not do, he with his Freeborough should restore the loss out
of the property of the malefactor as long as any should remain, failing which
he should complete (the restitution) out of his own and that of his
Free-borough, and should satisfy Justice according to what should be to them
lawfully adjudged, etc. Thus, all the honest inhabitants of every vicinage,
being answerable in their own private fortunes and property for all the damages
and depredations of robbers, house-breakers, and other lawless sons of
violence, committed within their own respective districts, would, of course, be
stimulated, by the urgent spur of private interest, to yield up a small portion
of their leisure to the necessary exercise of arms and training, for their
mutual defense against every act of violence and injustice; and on this ancient
provision of the Common Law was apparently founded the legality of levying
taxes on the inhabitants of London and Middlesex, to make good the damages
occasioned by the alarming riots in the year 1780. We ought, therefore, by no
means to repine at the late judgment of the Courts, whereby the Riot-Tax, to
make good the damages, was deemed legal, even before the Act was made for
levying it; but, on the contrary, to promote, as much as possible, a still more
effectual and complete revival of that most excellent institution of the Common
Law, that it may be constantly and regularly enforced (even in less and more
ordinary cases of robbery, house-breaking, etc.) for the immediate recovery of
all damages and losses by any act of violence whatsoever: the value of the
damages should be levied on ten housekeepers that are the nearest inhabitants
to the spot where the violence or robbery was committed: and if the 10 nearest
housekeepers should not be able to made good the damage, then 10 times 10 of
the nearest housekeepers, (or the hundred,) ought to be assessed, (and so on,
if necessary, to the whole county, for such was the ancient usage by the Common
Law,) for the damage; whereby all housekeepers would be prompted by their own
private interest to associate in arms with their respective neighbors to
suppress every act of unjust violence, and to maintain the public peace.

In the various-accounts of these ancient Free-boroughs, or Tithings, they are
sometimes mentioned, as consisting only of Ten Men; at other times, as
consisting of "ten men and their families" -- They be commonly named TITHINGS,
because they contain (as I told you) the number of TEN MEN WITH THEIR
FAMILIES. Lambard's Duties of Constables, p. 7. "This frank-pledge" (says Lord
Coke) consisted most commonly of ten households, etc. 2 Inst. p. 73.
: and therefore as all males, from 15 to 60 years of age, are required by law
to have arms and to be duly exercised therein, (which in a former Tract I have
already proved,) the number of males in a Tithing of the latter description
would amount to about thirty, (the proper number for a platoon,) if the average
rate of 3 males to a family might be supposed a just estimation, including
sons, lodgers, apprentices, journeymen, porters, and servants; though this must
vary in different neighbourhoods, according to the nature of the trades and
occupations carried on therein, as some employ many hands, and others but very
few.

Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other great men, having their own
proper officers, Sergeants, Esquires, Butlers, Confectioners, Bakers, etc. (see
the 21 law of King Edward,) were supposed to have each a Free-borough within
their own households, and were therefore not included in the ordinary Tithings
-- because they were a sufficient assurance for themselves and for their menial
servants; no less than the ten were, one for another, in the ordinary Dozeins.
-- See Cowell's Interpreter on the word Friburgh. This due exemption of the
great men, from the obligation of entering into the ordinary Decenaries, I wish
to be particularly noticed, because it may prevent the opposition of some
high-minded persons who would think themselves degraded, perhaps, by an
universal establishment of the Tithings. On the quotation, last made from Dr.
Cowell, it is necessary to remark, that the word dozeins is manifestly used for
decenns, or decenna, and so also very frequently by other law writers, but I
cannot find that these legal Societies, or Associations of neighbors, ever
consisted of dozeins or dozens, in the ordinary sense of that term, though they
are so very frequently called dozeins, merely, I presume, by corruption of
speech; so that the etymology of the English word dozen is not from duodecim,
as one would naturally suppose from the modern application of the word, but
from decenna and dizaine, the Latin and French appellations of the Tithings,
which were regularly Decenaries, consisting of ten men; or rather ten men and
their families, as I have before remarked. But, in the revival of Decenaries,
which I wish to promote, the number of persons in each Free-borough or
Decenary, (whether it shall consist of ten housekeepers with their families and
servants, or only of ten men,) must be determined by the votes of the
inhabitants themselves in every neighborhood, at their several General
Meetings, Folk-motes, or Ward-motes; because the service must be perfectly
voluntary; for, though the arrangement of the people into decenary companies
was actually ordained by the ancient laws of this realm, and was (and, I trust,
still is) required by the common law for the whole kingdom, yet one of the most
eminent common law writers of his time (Mr. Wm Lambard) mentions the formation
of these decenary companies as being the free act of the people themselves in
every neighborhood: for, according to him, the ancient usage was, that all
free borne men should CAST THEMSELVES into several companies by ten in each
company, etc. (Duties of Constables, etc. p. 7.) and our ancestors could not
have had any more urgent inducement, to render this service voluntary, than
what the present generation actually feels, viz. the necessity of self-defence
against rioters, thieves, robbers, and house-breakers; for, Mr. Lambard informs
us, just before, in the same page, that it was ordained for the more sure
KEEPING OF THE PEACE, and for the better repressing of THIEVES and ROBBERS,
that all freeborn men should CAST THEMSELVES into several companies, etc. so
that the REASON of this law, on which the FORCE of it should depend, does not
only still subsist, but is certainly as forcible and urgent as ever it was.
And, though this excellent custom was become almost obsolete, through neglect
and disuse, so long ago as the reign of Queen Elizabeth, yet, even then, it was
still considered as a legal institution, required by the common law; and the
renewal of it was recommended as easy and most efficacious for the maintenance
of the public peace: "whereof" (says the learned Lambard, speaking of the
ancient office of Borsholders, Tithingmen, etc.) there is yet some show or
remnant in our LEETS, or Law Days: but if the VERY SUBSTANCE THEREOF WERE
thoroughly performed [as I know no let (says that learned man, and surely no let
has since been ordained) but that by law it may] then should the peace of the
land be much better maintained. (Duties of Constables, etc. p. 9.) There is no
doubt but the effects would be as happy and beneficial as when the Tithings
were first established by Alfred; for, all the old Historians agree, that an
entire stop to all robbery and violence was immediately effected by this
regulation.

In the Chronicon of John Brompton, we are informed, that although laws in
times of war are silent, yet King Alfred, in the midst of the clashing of arms,
made laws, and instituted the Centuries, which they call Hundreds, and the
Decenaries, which they call Trithings, (he should have said Tithings,)
maintained peace amongst his own subjects, and chastized robbers in such sort,
that he commanded golden bracelets to be hung up in the roads, divided into 4
ways, which might brave the avidity of passengers, whilst there was none who
durst snatch them away: See Twisden's Hist. Anglicanae Scriptores Antiqui. P.
818.

Et licet inter arma Leges sileant, ipse tamen Aluredus Rex inter fremitus
armorum Leges tulit, et Centurias quas Hundredas dicunt, et Decurias quas
Trithingas (plainly an error for Tithingas) vocant instituit, pacem inter suos
custodivit, et latrones in tantum castigavit, quod in semitis quae per
quadrivium finduntur, armillas aureas jussit suspendi, quae viantium aviditatem
arriderent, dum non essent qui eas arriperent.


and Speed also tells us, from William of Malmsbury, that "His kingdom he"
(Alfred) likewise divided into Shires, Hundreds, and Tithings, for the better
ordering and administering of Justice, and for the abandoning of thieves, which
had formerly increased by the means (the very cause which at present exists)
of long wars; whereby, notwithstanding the multitude of Soldiers continually
employed, it is reported that a Virgin might travail alone in his days,
through all his dominions, without any violence offered; and that bracelets of
gold were hanged in the high ways, and no man so hardy as to take them away.
P. 358.

The ten householders or masters of families, from whose precise number of ten
the numerical appellations of Decenaries, Tithings, and Dozeins, are manifestly
derived, were themselves also individually distinguished by the title of
Deciners, from the youths, journeymen, lodgers, and servants, that were
included, and respectively pledged by the householders in the several
Decenaries.

A right understanding and due application of the term Deciner being necessary,
as I conceive, toward the promotion of a great national object at present, the
necessary reformation of popular Representation in Parliament; I hope my
readers will not think it too tedious to attend a little to the investigation
of the word, that we may clear it from the indiscriminate use which some
law-writers have made of it. The Circuit thereof (says Dr. Cowel in his
Interpreter, speaking of frank-pledge) was called DECENNA, because it commonly
consisted of TEN HOUSEHOLDS: and every particular person, thus mutually bound
for himself and his neighbors, was called DECENNIER, (more commonly, I
believe, Decener, and afterward by corruption Dozener,) BECAUSE he was of one
DECENNA or other. -- But this reason is not sufficiently accurate. -- The
youths, servants, etc. were all of one DECENNA or other, yet were they not
Decenners, though they were also mutually bound by oath for their good
behavior in their respective Decenaries; but those men only were properly
Deciners, who were more immediately responsible for all the rest, by being the
masters of the several families, viz. only the TEN householders in every
TITHING, who paid scot and lot, and were answerable for the payment of all
national as well as provincial and parochial burdens: these only were the men,
who had a judicial capacity, and were called altogether by the chief Freeborg,
or Headborough, on all occasions to consult and determine; on every question,
or extraordinary business, within the extent of their division. All the
individuals of the division indeed were suitors in the Tithing Court, and might
there be present, (as all courts were open,) and amenable thereto for offenses;
for the Decenna or Tithing Courts (however insignificant so confined a
jurisdiction as a Tithing may appear) were of admirable use in promoting
Justice, and deciding differences and quarrels amongst neighbors. The learned
Author of the Notes on Fortescue, (folio edit. in 1741,) p. 106. speaking of
the Court of the Free-borough or Tithing, adds, "wherein" (says he) the
Tithing-man or Headborough was the JUDGE. And indeed they are entitled, in the
laws of the Confessor, JUSTICIARII, JUSTICES; for such was their jurisdiction
and office within their Tithing. It is necessary, however, for the proper
understanding of the chapter, wherein this is mentioned, to be previously
informed, that the Latin noun, Friborgus, of the masculine gender, does not
properly signify a Free-Borough, Tithing, or Association of ten men, but rather
one individual Free-Borgess, of that Society: but, when the Society or
Association itself is to be collectively understood, the word is generally,
though not always, As there is an example at the latter end of this very law in
question, wherein Friborgos in all the copies is expressed instead of the
accusative plural of the neuter noun, Friborga, though the subject manifestly
relates to three Friburgs, or Societies, and not to three individual
Freeburgesses.
expressed in the neuter gender, -- Friborgum, -- as Dr. Cowel rightly
expresses in his Interpreter, on the word, Froborgh, alias Fridburgh, etc.

It is also manifest, by the explanation of titles given by the learned
Lambard, that nine persons of the Tithing were entitled FREOBORH, Atque hinc
novem illi quidem FREOBORH, id est, ingenui fidejussores dicebantur, nos in
titulis Curiarum Francos Plegios appellamus Decimus ille TEOTHUNGMON, id est
Decurio, dictus est, quo nomine hac nostra est tempestate occidentalibus Anglis
notissimus. Eum alii TIENHEOFOD, alii FREOBORHES-HEOFOD, id est, vadem
primarium et praecipuum nuncupabant. Lambard on the word Centuria.
that is Free-Sureties; "whom we" (says Mr. Lambard) "call frank pledges:" and
that the tenth man was called TEOTHUNGMON, that is, "DECURIO," (or Tithingman,)
and that " others called him TIENHEOFOD," (head of ten,) and "others again
Freoborhes heofod," (Freeburgess-head,) or Chief-Pledge. A comparison of these
terms with the terms mentioned in the old laws of St. Edward, No 20 and 32, and
the relation these terms bear respectively to each other, will clearly
demonstrate that the Justitiarios super quosque december Friborgos, therein
mentioned, were no other than Tithingmen, the Heads or Chiefs of each Decenary,
who in Latin were called Decani or Deans -- and that the Decem-Friborgos, 32d
Law of St. Edward. De Centurionibus et capitalibus Friborgis.

Cum autem contingeret quod quidam stulti et improbi gratis et nimis consuete
erga vicinos suos forisfacerent, caeperunt sapientes ad invicem super hoc
habere consilium, et statuerunt JUSTICIARIOS super quosque december Friborgos,
quos Decanos possumus appellare, anglice vero Tienheofod dicti sunt, 1.
Decemvir, caput de december, etc.


mentioned in that sentence, do not signify -- ten Tithings or Boroughs in
their collective capacity, (which would amount to a Hundred-Court,) but only
ten individuals, the ten Householders or Deceners of the Tithing, each of whom
Mr. Lambard calls "Freoborh," or Freeburgess. This being understood, we may
safely proceed to speak of the authority of the Tithingmen in their respective
divisions. -- "These" A continuation of the 32d Law of 1st Edward, beginning
from the end of the last quotation of it. -- Isti inter villas and vicinos
causas tractabant, and secundum forisfacturas emendationes capiebant, and
concordationes faciebant, videlicet, de pascuis, pratis, messibus, and de
litigationibus inter vicinos, and innumerabilibus huiusmodi decertationibus que
humanam fragilitatem infestant, and eam incessanter oppugnant. Cum autem causae
majores erumpebant, referebantur ad superiores eorum justiciarios quos
supradicti sapientes super eos constituerant, scilicet, super december decanos,
quos possumus dicere centuriones, vel centenarios, eo quod super centum
friborgos judicabunt.
(according to the Saxon laws, collected by King Edward the Confessor) TRIED
CAUSES among the villages and neighbors, and according to conviction (or
forfeiture on trial) "took satisfaction," (or damages,) and settled agreements,
concerning pastures, meadows, harvests, as also litigations between neighbors,
and innumerable such like disputes, which infest the weakness of human nature,
and continually annoy it. But, when causes of more consequence occurred, they
were referred to their superior JUSTICIARIES, whom the wise men (or national
council) had appointed over them, that is, over ten Deans, "(or chiefs of
tens,)" whom we may call -- CENTURIONS or CENTENARII, (hundreders,) because
they had jurisdiction over AN HUNDRED FRIBORGS, i. e. an hundred Freeburgesses
or Deciners).

Thus, it is manifest, that the Hundreders, or High Constables, were also
Justiciaries, so that every Hundred Householders, throughout the kingdom, had a
complete establishment of Civil Officers, (i. e. a High Constable and ten
Constables, all of whom were Justiciaries within their respective
jurisdictions,) to preserve the peace and settle differences amongst themselves
and their respective families. And though each, or all of these officers sat as
Judges, or Precidents, in their respective courts, yet their power was duly
limited by the opinion and determination of the Householders, or Deciners, from
whom the Juries (the real judges of the causes) were regularly chosen, and
still are, to this day, in most cities and trading towns, (as in London,)
without regard to any other qualification than that of their being housekeepers
of the vicinage, indifferent to the parties, of unblameable character, and
sufficient substance, not to be suspected of undue bias; or, as it is expressed
in an old form, -- such as be next neighbors, most sufficient, and least
suspicious. And in the act of 21 Edward I. there is an express clause reserving
the ancient rights of Juries to cities and burghs. And, Mr. Hawkins, on
mentioning this and another statute, (2 West.) remarks thereupon -- that,
neither by common law, nor by these statutes, there was any necessity in
proceedings before Justices in Air, etc. that PETIT JURORS should be
FREEHOLDERS; and, if so, (says he,) it seems probable that there is no greater
necessity that GRAND JURORS, making an enquiry before them, should be
FREEHOLDERS; and if a GRAND JUROR before such Justices need NOT be a
FREEHOLDER, why should there be a greater necessity that a GRAND JUROR before
other Justices should be a FREEHOLDER? etc. Pleas of the Crown 2d book, chap.
25. p. 217. And he repeats this doctrine in chap. 43. sect. 12. That, at the
common law, there was no necessity that JURORS should have ANY FREEHOLD, as to
inquests before Justices in Air, or in cities or burghs, etc. whereby the
judicial capacity of the Housekeepers or Deciners, without any qualification as
Landholders, is, I trust, sufficiently established. We are misled also in the
sense of the word Deciner, when it is applied (as by the learned Cowell) in a
peculiar manner to the chief or head of a Tithing. -- It signifies, (says he,)
in the ancient monuments of the law, such as were wont to have the oversight
and check of TEN FRIBOURGS for the maintenance of the King's peace. But the
Chief of the ten, as I have already shown, had his proper titles of
Headborough, and Tithingman; and, though each chief was always a Deciner, as
being himself one of the ten incorporated householders, yet he had no peculiar
title of Deciner, any otherwise than being the chief of the Deciners in his
division. The youths, and others, that were not householders, were pledged by
the Deciners, as appears by Briton, cap. 12. -- Volons nous que trestous ceux
de xiv ans desouthe nous facent le serement, etc. -- et velons que toutz soient
en Dizeyne, et pleuys par Descyners, sauve gentz de religion, clers et
chevaliers, et leur fitz eynes, et femes. -- We will that all those which are
fourteen years old shall make oath to us, etc. and that all shall be in
TITHINGS, and pledged by Deciners, etc. The law could not mean that all should
be pledged by the respective Headboroughs alone, but, certainly, by the TEN
householders of each Decenary. And Dr. Cowell himself also, in the latter part
of that article, says, -- that DECENNIER is not now used for the chief man of a
DOZEN, but for him that is sworn to the King's peace; neither in this is he
sufficiently accurate; for the being sworn to the King's peace did not
constitute a Decener, in the proper sense of the word, though it included the
person sworn in the jurisdiction of a Decenary.

The title of Deciner could not properly belong to any but the ten householders
themselves, from whose number his division was formerly called Tienmantale, id
est, (says Mr. Lambard,) Decemvirale collegium, -- a society of ten men. Nine
of these, as Mr. Lambard declares, were called Freoborh, (Free Burgess,) i. e.
free pledges, and the tenth was called Teothungmon, (Tithingman,) i. e.
Decurio. Now, it seems the office and title of Decurio was used in Britain,
long before the Saxon Kings, by the Romans, as well in their civil as their
military establishments: and the learned author of the notes on the folio
edition of Fortescue's excellent tract, de Laudibus Legum Angliae, observes in
p. 31. -- that the ROMANS had their laws, in such parts of this land, as they
had their most civil government in; I mean, (says he,) in colonies hither
deduced. For every colony was but an image of the mother city, with like holy
rites, like courts, laws, etc. and for the most part with DUUMVIRI instead of
Consuls, and AEDILES and DECURIONES in lieu of a Senate: and it is clear (says
he) that diverse colonies from Rome were in Britain, as at Camelodunum, now
Malden in Essex, etc.

The consideration of this circumstance enables us to propose a much more
probable etymology of the English word Denizen than what is generally assigned.
Lord Coke supposes it from deins nee, born within; and also from Donaison,
because the freedom is given by the King. But a learned writer (Davies)
asserts, that Denizen is a British law term, which the Saxons and Angles found
here and retained. It could not, therefore, be derived from the French tongue,
before that modern language was known, or even formed.

Neither is the Welsh etymology of it at all satisfactory, because it seems
very uncouth, and not sufficiently similar in sound to the word. But, if we
derive the word immediately from the Latin, it will appear most natural and
easy, both in sound and sense; for, the word Deni, being derived a December pro
Deceni, is a proper adjective expressive of its relation to the number of ten
persons in a Decenary; and, as the Romans had their Decuriones, and
consequently Decenaries also, a proper Latin verb to express the initiation or
introduction of a person to the privileges and franchises of a Decenary, is
very naturally formed from the word Deni, viz. Denizo, which verb and its
derivatives are frequently used by our law-writers, when they speak of the
admission of Aliens to the franchises of the native inhabitants; and, the said
franchises being maintained in ancient times by mutual frank-pledge in the
several Decenaries, it is obvious, that the participle "Denizatus," which
frequently occurs, and the derived noun-substantive "Denizatio," are applied in
such cases in their proper Latin sense; though the law-writers, who used them,
have overlooked that most obvious etymology, which is confirmed by the sound as
well as the true Latin sense of those terms.

Lord Coke says Denizen is taken for an alien born, that is infranchised, or
DENIZATED by Letters Patent, whereby the King does grant unto him, that in all
things he should be reputed, esteemed, held, and governed, as our liege
subject, sprung up (from his ancestors) within our said kingdom of England, and
not otherwise, nor in any other manner. And he cites Dier, in the same page, 1
Inst. lib. 2. p. 129. respecting this ligeance of Denizens, Ligentia Domino
Regi debita, etc. Data (est) aut per denizationem, aut per naturalizationem. --
When foreigners, therefore, were admitted to the privileges and franchises of
Englishmen, they became the King's liege subjects, -- esse ad fidem Regi
Angliae, and were of course denizated, or admitted to be members of some
Decenary, and would be sworn to their ligeance in common with other subjects in
the court of frank-pledge; and if the denizated stranger rented a house, and
paid scot and lot, and other rates, he became a Frioborh, or Freeburgess,
having a right to vote for Representatives in the national Council: so that
Lord Coke was certainly right in using the terms infranchised, and denizatus,
as synonymous: for the renting of a house, at a certain rent, by the year, is
the ancient legal description of burgage tenure. "It is called BURGH," (says
Sir Edward Coke,) because it sends BURGESSES to Parliament. And, though this
is not the proper derivation of the word, it is certainly the usage of borough,
and as well as the right of all Burgesses.

"They that have tenements" (says Littleton) within the Borough (or Burgh)
hold of the King their tenements, and every tenant for his tenement ought to
pay to the King A CERTAIN RENT BY THE YEAR. -- 1 Inst. lib. 2. c. 10. sect.
162. The next section declares the same doctrine, concerning those who rent of
any other Lord. And the same manner is, where another Lord spiritual or
temporal is Lord of such a BOROUGH, and the TENANTS OF THE TENEMENTS in such a
Borough, hold of their Lord, TO PAY EACH OF THEM YEARLY AN ANNUAL RENT. Sect.
163. And it is called TENURE IN BURGAGE, (says Littleton,) for that the
tenements within the Borough be HOLDEN OF THE LORD OF THE BOROUGH BY CERTAIN
RENT, etc. And it is, to wit, that the ancient towns, called BURROUGHES, BE
THE MOST ANCIENT TOWNS THAT BE IN ENGLAND; for the towns, that now be CITIES
OR COUNTIES, in old time were BOROUGHES, and called BOROUGHES, for of such old
towns, called BOROUGHES, CAME THE BURGESSES OF THE PARLIAMENT, when the King
has summoned his Parliament. Sect. 164.

Now, this description of paying an annual rent, or holding tenements by
certain rent by the year, is the proper distinction of a tenant in Burgage from
a tenant at will, because the latter "has no certain nor sure estate," (says
Littleton,) for the Lessor may put him out at what time it pleases him. Lib.
1. c. viii. 68. But very different is the case of tenants for years, (as
Littleton remarks in the same Chapter, Otherwise it is if tenant for years,
which knows the end of his term, does sow the land, etc. Ibid.
) and those persons who agree with the owners of their houses at a certain
rent, howsoever small, for any fixed time, if it be but for half a year, or
even for a quarter of a year, are nevertheless to be esteemed in law as tenants
for years, ( quod tenent ad terminum annorum. Lib. 1. C. 7. Sect. 67.) For they
enjoy a free and certain possession to the end of the agreed term, so that
their tenure is perfectly free; and they have sometimes been entitled "Liberi
Tenentes," and Freeholders, in contradistinction to tenants in villanage,
though they are indeed freholders in a very different sense from the common
acceptance of the term freeholder, now applied only to those who are properly
land owners; which would therefore be a less equivocal title for them; the
others being also freeholders, or free tenants, though in a less durable
tenure. But, their ancient indisputable RIGHT, of sending Burgesses to
Parliament, proves their freedom, as members of the community. In the Borough
of Southwark, and many others to this day, the renters of tenements, or
housekeepers in general, paying scot and lot, are the Electors of the Deputies
to Parliament; so that the doctrine is unquestionable. And, in the City of
Westminster, and several other ancient cities, the same RIGHT, by burgage
tenure, of voting for Representatives, prevails to this day; because, all
Cities were originally deemed. Boroughs, as being the habitations of
freo-borges, or free pledges, i. e. the associated householders, who were
mutually pledged to maintain the public peace, and defend and support the due
execution of the laws: and, if the right of voting were fully restored,
throughout the kingdom, to all householders, or masters of families, who
principally support the burdens of the state, even if the franchise should
descend no lower, it would be amply sufficient, I trust, to destroy the present
deplorable corruption in the representation, or rather the mis-representation,
of the Commons, and to restore the ancient dignity and freedom of Parliament;
especially if all the said householders were duly incorporated as Deciners or
Free-Borhes, in their respective neighbourhoods.

For then the number of Deciners or Freeholders in each county would be
regularly known, howsoever much the numbers of other males in the several
Tithings might vary; and the advantage of this regularity of numbers would not
only be the effecting a proportionable regularity of manners, but it would also
greatly facilitate the much wished-for measure of a more equal representation
of the people; nay, the representation may be made not only more equal, but
most equal or perfectly equal, if all Deciners in each county were allowed to
vote, as unquestionably, in justice and constitutional right, they ought to do:
for, the junction of ten equal hundreds of Deciners into one associated body
would form the court of the thousand, well known in the Israelitish
commonwealth; which, considered as a proportionable division of a county,
perfectly regular in numerical order, both of Officers and other Deciners,
would much facilitate the conducting and ordering of public business. And two
such divisions, of a thousand Deciners each, would be a proper number to send
one Deputy to Parliament, according to the present population of the kingdom,
so as not to exceed, but rather diminish, the present number of
representatives. Thus, a most equal representation of all the families in the
kingdom would be obtained; and two thousand families (one with another) might
well afford to pay ample wages to one Representative; and the stipend might be
very easily collected, if the Decenaries were duly formed and established, and
the several courts, which regularly arise from the Decenaries, viz. the Hundred
Courts, and also the Courts of one Thousand families each, above proposed; and
lastly, the junction of two such Courts of the Thousand, for the election of
one Representative in the great Common Council of the Realm. The people, of
whatever parties, or separate interests, might go up altogether with their
separate Tithings, or by their Hundreds, to the Poll Books, (in like manner as
the ancient Romans voted by their Centuries,) by which means order would be
preserved, and no persons would be permitted to vote, but those that were known
to dwell and reside in the place, or county, where the election is made,
according to an ancient rule of the constitution; eligantur in quolibet
comitatu per homines in eodem comitatu commorantes et residentes: See my Tract
on Equitable Representation, etc. p. 26 and 27; and also an Act of Parliament
there quoted, which is still in force, 1 Hen. V. c. 1. It is therefore an act
of gross corruption, utterly repugnant to the ancient constitution of the
kingdom, to bear the traveling charges of voters who dwell in distant places;
for such ought not to be permitted to vote at all, except on the spot where
they reside, by which not only much expense would be saved to the Candidates,
but also much immorality, debauchery, and tumult, against the public peace at
elections, Extract, respecting Bribery at Elections from A Representation of
the Injustice and dangerous Tendency of tolerating Slavery in England. Printed
in 1769. P. 16. to 18.

"But how is he" (a Negro claimed by a Slaveholder as private property) "to be
divested of his human nature? or of his just right to the King's protection?

"A man may, indeed, be said to be divested of his humanity, 1st, in a moral
sense, by his own action, in stooping to any kind of baseness beneath the
dignity of a man. And, 2dly, by the execution of the laws, in punishment of
some particular kinds of baseness, for which a man may lawfully be divested of
his humanity by a civil death: that is, may be disabled to hold any office or
franchise, etc. as if such person was naturally dead. This is one of the
penalties expressed in a Statute (2 Geo. II. chapter 24.) against bribery and
corruption in Parliamentary Elections, whereby, not less the Briber than the
Bribed, (whether the offense be committed by himself or any person employed by
him) is subjected to the divesture abovementioned. But the vilest and most
ignorant Negro Slaves are not so inhumanly base and degenerate as these
Timeservers, who offend against God! the King! their friends and fellow
subjects! themselves! and all their unhappy posterity, even the children that
are unborn! They are enemies to the State, infinitely more to be dreaded, than
the most puissant foreign power at open war!

"No shuffling arts or equivocations whatsoever can lighten this monstrous load
of guilt, for which the offenders must one day most certainly be called to
account, notwithstanding that they may have escaped the penalties of this
English Statute: for indeed it is merely the penalties (or execution) of the
said Statute which they escape and not the guilt of breaking it; because the
same is so warily drawn up, that there is not the least room for mental
reservation.

"A very large proportion of the freeholders in this kingdom, it is to be
feared, are involved in this horrid guilt! Nay every elector who has but even
EATEN or DRUNK at the expense of another, during the time of an election, is
likewise in some measure guilty! (though charity will incline us to suppose
that their offense is, for the most part, occasioned by ignorance, rather than
wilful corruption;) for, not only money, but also any Gift, Office, Employment,
or OTHER REWARD WHATSOEVER is forbid by the said Act. Now this prohibition must
necessarily include meat and drink, since these articles cannot be considered
below the estimation of a "REWARD," because they are expressly prohibited by a
preceding Act still in force, (viz. 7 W. III. chapter 4.) whereby those Candidates,
who shall directly or indirectly give, present, or allow, to any person or
persons, having voice or vote in such election, any money, MEAT, DRINK,
ENTERTAINMENT, or PROVISION, etc. are rendered incapable (though elected) to
act, sit, or have any vote or place in parliament, etc. Happy would it be for
England, if this salutary law could be strictly enforced! Bribes in money,
places, etc. are not productive of half so much evil as the debaucheries of
election entertainments, because the pernicious effects of the latter are so
permanent, that they may fairly be said to be transmitted from election to
election. The gross immorality, as well as the deplorable idleness and poverty,
(all forerunners of slavery) which too much prevail in many parts of this
kingdom ought, (I sincerely believe) to be principally attributed to the
unlawful practice of opening houses for public entertainment at elections: and
we cannot hope that this dangerous evil will ever be corrected, unless the
wisdom of the legislature shall hereafter think fit to oblige every candidate
(as soon as he declares himself such) to promise, upon oath, that he will
strictly observe every article of the last mentioned Act, against treating
electors. This long digression, from the subject of Negro Slaves, the author
hopes may be pardoned, especially if the reader will please to consider, that
civil and political Slavery, as well as Slavery to sensual appetites, are so
very nearly connected with each other, in their nature and effects, that it is
no very considerable transition from the present point to speak of them
together. But the case of this poor Negro is very different. If he is a Slave,
yet it was not with his own consent that he was made so. He neither sold
himself, nor has he betrayed others, and cannot therefore be liable to such
severe penalties. He has not been guilty of any offenses, that I know of, for
which he might lawfully (like corrupt and venal voters who accept of money,
meat, or drink, at elections) be divested of his humanity; and therefore it
must certainly be allowed, that he differs from a horse or a dog in this very
essential point, viz. his humanity."


would be prevented.

The number of houses in England and Wales, in the year 1777, fell short of a
million, as the reader may see by a much better authority than mine is, that of
the very able and ingenious calculator Dr. Price. See -- Observations on the
Population of England and Wales, p. 11. Total of houses charged, chargeable,
and excused. In 1761, 980, 692. -- In 1777, 952,734.
But, for the sake of a round number, "Let it, however," says Dr. Price, "be
stated at a million," (p. 14.) The number of Deciners, or Householders, we may,
therefore, also state at one million: for the character of Householder, without
farther distinction, happily includes all persons of every rank and
denomination that ought, in strict justice, and ancient prescription of
constitutional right, to elect and send their own Representatives to
Parliament, whether as Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses.

The million of Householders would form exactly ONE THOUSAND divisions of one
thousand Householders each, viz. 1000 Courts of the Thousand, which I have
before recommended from ancient example: and the junction of two such Courts of
the Thousand, for the election of one Member of Parliament, as before proposed,
would form 500 Courts of two thousand Householders each, which would elect five
hundred Representatives for South Britain; a proportion sufficiently near to
the number 513, at present elected for that part of the kingdom; because a
reduction in number, would, perhaps, be more beneficial than otherwise; for
certain it is, that the ancient Parliaments were not near so numerous as at
present, even without reckoning the Deputies from North Britain.

This plan would indeed occasion some variation in modes and forms, but no real
innovation with respect to the national constitution; because the right of
election would still be vested where it ought, viz. in ALL the free
Householders, or Freo-borges, of ALL the counties; and that, in the most
perfect proportion of equality that can be desired; which ought surely to
recommend the proposal, if equal representation is at all a worthy object, --
if justice and right are to be preferred to their opposite extremes, in-equity
or iniquity, and tort, which have too long prevailed; -- or lastly, if we have
honesty or humanity enough left amongst us, in the fear of God, to reject the
evil and choose the good, i. e. to exercise that only faculty, which materially
distinguishes men from brutes!

Should we ever be so happy as to see the true divisions of Tithings and
Hundreds, re-established in this realm, and the just reformation of Parliament
(as here proposed to be effected by them) actually take place by the
establishment of equal representation, numerically exact, (which it really may
be, if we have but common honesty enough amongst us to desire and promote it,)
there will be an admirable harmony in the several gradations and proportions of
public officers, or magistrates, over the Commons of England and Wales,
according to the present supposed state of population: viz.

Deciners or Householders, paying scot and lot, and mutually pledging each
other and their respective families and servants to the common peace and common
desence 1,000,000 Tithingmen or Captains of Tens, the elected heads of every
ten Deciners, being Constables by the common law 100,000 Hundreders, the
elected chiefs of every ten Tithings, being High-Constables, and Justiciaries,
or Justices, by the common law 10,000 Chiliarchs, or Colonels, the elected
Chiefs of Thousands, being not only Civil Magistrates, or Justices, but also
the King's military Lieutenants in their districts 1,000 Senators, or
Representatives, in Parliament elected every year once, and more often if need
be, in 500 courts of 2000 Deciners each 500
But the facility of equalizing, and thereby reforming, the representation of
the people in the great national Council, is not the only benefit that might be
obtained by restoring the ancient mode of government by Tithings, Hundreds, etc.

In all these various divisions of the people, regular courts were anciently
held for the maintenance of peace and right, and for adjusting all differences
amongst neighbors, without expense; for, there was no cause or contest of such
magnitude and importance, for which a popular court of proportionable dignity
could not be found in the larger divisions of Wappentakes, Trithings, and
Shires, to adjust and determine it; whereby tedious and vexatious lawsuits, and
the ruinous expenses attending them, were happily avoided. In like manner, the
general Assemblies, or Congregations, held in the gates of the Israelites,
while under the theocracy, were esteemed courts for justice and judgment;
wherein presided Judges and Officers, that were freely elected by the
inhabitants of each city or district, as I have elsewhere shown (see p. 3-5.);
and the same reasonable mode of settling private differences, by the
Congregation, (or Church,) was not unknown, even among Heathen Nations. The
people of Ephesus, it seems, retained this salutary constitution of popular
liberty, even when under the yoke of the Roman Beast; and had a power of
holding popular assemblies, (called Ecclesia, or Church,) for resolving
difficult questions and disputes between individuals, besides the ordinary
Courts of Justice, under the Roman Deputies, for common offenses. This appears
by the speech of the Town Clerk of Ephesus, (recorded in Acts xix. 37-39.) who,
after he had appeased the tumult and confusion of the people, that had hastily
run together, without notice or summons to specify the cause of assembling; he
said -- Ye have brought hither these men, (meaning two of Paul's companions
whom they had seized,) which are neither robbers of Churches, nor yet
blasphemers of your Goddess. Wherefore, if Demetrius, and the craftsmen which
are with him, have a matter against any man, THE LAW IS OPEN, (or rather -- the
court-days are held,) and there are DEPUTIES: let them implead one another. But
if ye enquire any thing concerning OTHER MATTERS, it shall be determined in a
LAWFUL ASSEMBLY, (...), in a lawful Ecclesia, i.e. in a congregation
convocated, or called together, in due form and order, by the proper officers;
this having been neglected in the then last hasty and tumultuous assembling of
the people, which occasioned the Ephesian Town-Clerk's harangue. So perfectly
unexceptionable is this mode of determining private quarrels and contests,
without expense, by a popular assembly, that it seems clearly to be pointed out
for the practice of Christians, in the commands even of OUR LORD HIMSELF, on
the case of a trespassing brother. Mat. xviii. 15-17. Go and tell him his fault
(said our Lord) between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have
gained thy brother. But, if he will not hear, take with thee one or two more,
etc. -- And, if he shall neglect to hear them, -- (...), " tell unto THE
CHURCH," (not unto the Prelate of the Church, as Popish writers contend,
therein grossly perverting So deluded and unguarded has the Roman Church been
in her apostasy, that a very learned Jesuit, Cornelius a Lapide, was not
ashamed to suppose various causes wherein this order of redress, commanded in
this text, " might be omitted, or INVERTED" (he might as well have said at once
PERVERTED.) -- Porro varias ob causas HIC ORDO OMITTI vel INVERTI potest, ac
suhinde debet, ut is, qui peccavit, statim deferatur AD SUPERIOREM, etc. which,
being no part of the order enjoined by Christ, is a manifest PERVERSION of the
command, a glaring attempt to render the word of God of none effect, by vain
traditions, for which he had no better authority than a bare reference to some
of his own order, one Salmeron, etc.
the divine command by their vain traditions,) but, (...) "unto the
congregation," including the Laity as well as Clergy. And the Apostle Paul
reproved the Corinthians, for carrying their contests about worldly matters
((...), things pertaining to this life) before the established imperial Courts
of Justice, where unbelievers presided; which contests ought to have been
judged amongst themselves by the Congregation of Christian Brethren, (1 Cor.
vi. 1-6.) But, after the general establishment of Christianity, in this or any
other nation, the several popular Courts of the Tithings, or Hundreds, or
Thousands, or Counties, duly convened, are the proper Congregations of
Christian Brethren for every neighborhood: and, in ancient times, all those
courts, where the sheriffs held their Tourns, (or rotulary visitations,) took
cognizance not only of (...), worldly matters, but also more especially of
Ecclesiastical Cases, as being the FIRST, Agantur itaque PRIMO debita verae
Christianitatis Jura: Secundo Regis placita: POSTREMO causae singulorum dignis
satisfactionibus expleantur. 4 Inst. p. 260.
or most important objects of their attention: for thus the order of cases,
falling under their cognizance, is stated (as Lord Coke informs us, 4 Inst. p.
259 and 260) in the Red-Book, inter Leges H. I. cap. 8. de generalibus placitis
comitatuum, i.e. (says he) " as well of the TOURN" (beforementioned) "as of
the County Courts," viz.

Let the due laws of true Christianity be FIRST discussed; secondly, the pleas
of the King; lastly, let the causes of individuals be dispatched with suitable
redress, (or "satisfactions").

The Bishops, Sir Edward Coke, by a citation from the Red Book in the custody
of the King's Remembrancer, composed in the time of Henry I. proves that the
Bishops were then required to be present in popular courts of common law. He
refers us to the 8th chap. de generalibus placitis comitatuum, which he
interprets as well of the tourn as of the county court. Sicut antiqua fuerit
institutione firmatum, salutari Regis imperio, vera nuper est recordantione
firmatum, GENERALIA COMITATUUM PLACITA certis locis, et vicibus et definito
tempore per singulas Angliae provincias convenire debere, nec ullis ultra
fatigationibus agitari, nisi propria Regis necessitas, vel commune
Regnicommodum, saepius adjiciant. INTERSINT autem EPISCOPI, comites,
vicedomini, Vicarii, Centenarii, Aldermanni, Praefecti, Praepositi, Barons,
Vavasores, Tungrevii, (Recorders of towns,) et caeteri terrarum Domini
diligenter intendentes ne malorum impunitas aut gravionum pravitas, ( the
corruption of Magistrates, more particularly of the Judges of the Exchequer,
who were Graviones,) vel judicum subversio solita miseros laceratione
confiniant. Agantur itaque PRIMO debita verae Christianitatis jura; SECUNDO
Regis placita; POSTREMO causae singulorum dignis satisfactionibus expleantur.
-- "Whereupon they conclude," (says Sir E. Coke,) THAT ECCLESIASTICAL CAUSES
were handled in the tourn, in the reign of Henry I. LONG AFTER the said
supposed charter. (a charter to extend the tyrannical papal authority, which
was not enrolled till "the second Richard II. being never heard of before,"
though pretended, by the forgers of it, to have been granted by William the
Conqueror,) And certain it is, (continues Sir E. Coke,) that the Bishops
Consistories were erected, and the causes ecclesiastical removed from the TOURN
to the Consistory, AFTER the making of the said Red Book: Ideo penes lectorem
sit judicium. 4 Inst. c. 53. p. 200.
as well as the Earls, Lord-Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Hundreders, Aldermen,
Mayors, Magistrates, etc. presided in these ancient Courts of the Congregation,
whereby they were enabled to enforce the said "due laws of true Christianity,"
against all offenders (whether Clergy or Laity,) through the united power of
the Congregation, which regularly assembled at certain fixed places, and at
stated times; Viz. in the reign of Henry I. the County Court was assembled
twice, and the Hundreds and Wapentachs twelve times, in a year. -- Debet enim
Shiresgemot his, Hundreda et Wapentachia duodecies, in anno, CONGREGARI. 4
Inst. c. 53. p. 260. These Courts, in their different degrees of importance,
proportionable to the magnitude of all questions to be discussed, were the
proper Courts of the Congregation, to decide according to the due laws of true
Christianity beforementioned.
the united power of many being sufficiently effectual to resist and humble the
most audacious individuals, howsoever great and opulent: whereas, at present,
the most barefaced enormities of immorality and irreligion are beyond the
reach of ecclesiastical correction: the episcopal Authority (and more
especially that which ought to restrain the Laity) being reduced almost to
nothing, through the fallacious enervating innovations and usurpations of the
antichristian church of Rome, the grand enemy The inimical spirit of Popery
against the true Christian Episcopacy began very early to be manifested, for
the Apostasy could not generally take place (as I have before remarked) until
the Clergy and People were deprived of their ancient right of electing their
own Bishops, so that a violent usurpation of that right must of course be found
amongst the first innovations of antichrist. A remarkable instance of it by
POPE GREGORY THE FIRST, in the year 591, I find recorded even by a popish
Abbot, who appeals to Gregory's own epistles and decretals for the truth of it;
so that the apostasy was certainly at that time begun; for, though Gregory
himself is too commonly esteemed a good primitive Bishop, yet his Church had
then, for several years back, received the brand mark of the growing apostasy,
by permitting their Bishops to revive the wounded head of Roman power, by
assuming the Pagan Title of Pontifex Maximus, which the Emperors of Rome alone
had exclusively held from the time of Julius Caesar, down at least to
Valentinian the Third, to whom it may be traced, if not to Augustulus, till it
became extinct or dead with the power of the last Emperor of the Western
branch: so that Pontifex Maximus was manifestly the head, that was, as it were,
wounded to death by a sword, -- viz. the sword of Odoacer, who then took
possession of "the seat of the Dragon," and set up an independent kingdom in
ROME itself, without the peculiar title of UNLIMITED ROMAN dominion; so that
afterward when the Bishops of Rome, by assuming that title, did actually
revive that blasphemous head, his deadly wound was healed, and all the world
wondered after the Beast;" and well might they wonder, because the title of
Pontifex Maximus, is not less foreign to the primitive church of Christ than it
had been peculiar to the head of the Roman idolatrous Augurs, on account of a
ridiculous and strange kind of ceremony in the inauguration of the elected
PONTIFF; La Consecratione di questo PONTEFICE e tanto ridicula et strana, che
ella merita d'essere tutta interamente dimostrata nel medesimo modo che l'ha
scritta Prudentio: il quale dice che questo PONTEFICZ nel suo habito
Pontificale, con la mitera (and it was a mitre of the same shape as those worn
by the modern Pontifs, except that it was not then marked with the ominous
insignia of three crowns; and the spike at the top, as represented in a coin of
Augustus Caesar, was not yet converted into a cross,) in testa, et la vest
alzata entravia in una fossa, supra la quale era un PONTE di legno tutto
buccato, (so that the name of Pontifex is manifestly derived from this wooden
Pons or Bridge, bored full of holes,) dove dal vittimario era condotto un toro
ornato tutto di fiori et d'oro intorno al capo, che il detro conduttore feriva
nel petto, et del Sangue cosi caldo che n'usciva et trapelava per i buscbi del
PONTE, cra il detto PONTEFICE tutto imbrattato confregarse ne gl' occhi,
gl'orecchi, le labia, et la bocca, et cosi uscendo fuora cosi sporcho et
brutto, et molto terribile a riguardare, era da tutto il populo salutato et
ADORATO, etc. Discorso della Religione de gl'antichi Romani. Composto in
Franzese dal S. Guglielmo Choul, -- et tradotto in Toscano da M. Gabriel
Simeoni Fiorentino in Lione, 1569. P. 236.
whom they placed in his pontifical robes under a wooden PONS, or bridge, built
for that purpose over a dry ditch, and bored full of holes, that the blood of
the victim (a bull sacrificed to Jupiter on the top of the bridge) might fall
through the holes upon the head and robes of the PONTIFF, whereby that Vicar of
Satan on earth was rendered "terrible to behold," that he might be "saluted,"
(most "probably on the FEET,) " and ADORED by the people:" whereby the ancient
Pagan Pontifs were notable types as well of the bloody Roman Emperors, who
afterward usurped to themselves the pontifical dignity and office, and were
likewise ADORED and deified, as of the still more bloody, though ADORED,
ecclesiastical Apostates, who, under the same title, and authority, of Pontifex
Maximus, drenched all Europe in blood, by ordering crusadoes even against
Christians, and inciting their votaries to blood, by grants of plenary
indulgences for sin!

This true etymology of the word Pontifex proves that it is foreign and
inapplicable to any office or dignity in the Church of Christ; though Latin
writers, since the middle of the sixth century, have industriously substituted
it for Episcopus, the proper official title of Christian Bishops. Near twenty
years after the time that the Roman Emperors lost this title of unlimited and
illegal power by the sword of ODOACER, it was wickedly assumed by Pope
Gelasius, and afterward by Anastasius the second, and other succeeding Popes,
as the learned Anthony Van Dale has proved in the second of his nine
Dissertations, p. 192. Nevertheless, the wounded head could not be said to be
completely healed, (and consequently the commencement of 1260 years of bestial
power could not take place,) whilst the regal power of the Heruli, of the
Goths, or of the Greek Emperor, by his Exarchs, were possessed of the throne
of the Beast. But, before the time of Pope Gregory, three of the first national
regal governments, or horns, (without reckoning the government of the Greek
Emperors, which does not so properly fall under that description, because it
was cotemporary with the former empire,) which sprang up from the ruins of the
Imperial Pontifex Maximus, had actually possessed themselves of the imperial
city by conquest, and again had successively lost their dominion, being
fundamentally destroyed, and "plucked up by the roots," viz. the kingdom of the
Vandals, from Africa under Genseric, that of the Heruli under Odoacer, and that
of the Ostrogoths, from Theodoric to Tottilas and Theias. And, as soon as these
three horns were fallen from their power in the bloody city, Pope Pelagius (a
name which signifies DIVISION, as much as the name of the ancient Peleg or
Phalec, "for in his days was the earth divided,") was emboldened publicly to
avow and establish a system of religious persecution and compulsion, in order
to give effectual weight to papal decisions; for he ordained, that Haeretics
and Schismatics might be coerced by the SECULAR ARM, when they could not be
drawn to wholesome doctrine by arguments. -- Ut haeretici et schismatici
coerceri etiam SECULARI MANU possent: quando ad sanitatem rationibus non
deducerentur. (Platinae hist. de vitis pontificum, p. xxxiii. b.) And Pope
Gregory was so confident in this pontifical system of the SECULAR ARM, (as well
as all his successors, who have generally been adroit in engaging the
neighboring powers to avenge the Papal quarrels, occasionally, one upon
another,) that he was not content merely to rebuke, but dared even to affront,
the Greek Emperor Mauricius, by contumeliously taunting him with his very low
descent, ex infima sort "hominum," said Gregory. See Platinae hist p. xxxv.

We need not wonder, therefore, at his boldness, in usurping an unlimited
authority over the poor unarmed Italian BISHOPS, (who were otherwise his equals
in real dignity of office,) deposing them according to his will, (a manifest
token of the Beast,) and openly violating the most sacred rights of the Italian
CLERGY, AND PEOPLE, in their episcopal elections, that he might fill the
Italian sees with Monkish Prelates, who would be more attached to the growing
power than married Bishops, such as were, for the most part, those of the
primitive Church. But the particular instance, which I proposed to mention, was
at Rimini, in the year 591, where, on the death of a Bishop, Gregory sent a
legate to interfere in the election; and one Odeatinus, a nobleman, being
nevertheless elected Bishop, the Pontif was pleased (PLACUISSET PONTIFICI) to
command them, on pain of pontifical censure, to place another person in the sea. The man elected and consecrated for this purpose by Gregory was Castorius,
who, not being elected by the people of Rimini, was of course thwarted by them,
and suffered many things by PARTY OPPOSITION, the very evil which Gregory
pretended to avoid by his MOST PARTIAL corruption of the election, ne illam, i.
e. electionem, STUDIA PARTIUM corrumperent, for that was his plea for
interference. Besides this opposition, Castorius was grievously afflicted with
a distemper in his head, on account of which he was invited by the Pontif to
change the air and visit him at Rome; but, being even there no better, he
requested the Pontif that a Pastor might be sent to his church, who could
better promote the divine service; and, when the Pontif's hope of Castorius's
recovery by the Roman air abated, he administered the charge of the church of
Rimini by Leontius, Bishop of Urbin, (a second usurpation,) who was also a
Bishop of his own appointment. In the mean while the sick Castorius urged the
Pontif with his entreaties; and at length prevailed on him to grant "POWER TO
THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE" of Rimini to "elect a Bishop for themselves," (i. e. to
be re-instated in their ancient right,) which was done in the year 595, as may
easily be known (says my author) from the Epistles of Gregory the Great; and he
refers us to the decretals, where the whole affair (says he) is related. See
Italia sacra, sive de Episcopis Italiae, etc. Autore D. Ferdinando Ughello
Florentino ABBATE S S. Vincentii, et Anastasii ad aquas Salvias Ordinis
Citerciensis, et Sacrae Indicis Congregationis Consultore. Tom. II. P. 418.
Published permissu superiorum.


to the true limited Episcopacy. For, the Popish Bishops, by continually
grasping at undue power, at length obtained in England a removal of all
ecclesiastical causes, and religious questions, respecting morality as well as
doctrine, from the cognizance of our congregational courts of common law, -- Ut
nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus de Legibus Episcopalibus AMPLIUS in
Hundretto, (i. e. in Turno) "placita teneant," (which is a plain
acknowledgement however, that all pleas, relating to Episcopal Laws, were held
in the Hundred Court before the publication of this pretended charter,) nec
causam quae ad regimen animarum pertinet ad judicium saecularium hominum
adducant, sed quicunque secundum Episcopales Leges de quacunque causa vel culpa
interpellatus fuerit, ad locum quem ad hoc Episcopus elegerit, et nominaverit,
veniat, ibique de causa sua respondeat, et non secundum Hundrettum, ( this not
intended of the Hundred Court, Sir E. Coke remarks, but, that in those times
the Sheriff did hold his Tourn per Hundreda. See Mag. Chart. cap. 35. and the
exposition thereupon,) sed secundum Canones et Episcopales Leges rectum Deo et
Episcopo suo faciat. Si vero aliquis per superbiam elatus ad justitiam
Episcopalem venire non voluerit, vocetur semel, et secundo, et tertio; quod, si
nec sic ad emendationem venerit, excommunicetur, etc. 4 Inst. c. 53. p. 259.
to their own consistories, to be holden at such times, and at such places, as
they themselves should be pleased to direct; so that when and where were
equally unlimited and uncertain! and the causes were then to be adjudged
according to foreign Canons and Decretals unknown to the people! More effectual
means could not be devised for reducing the nation to the most abject slavery
under the papal usurpation! To accomplish this baneful purpose, a fictitious
charter was produced, bearing the title of Willielmus gratia Dei Rex Anglorum,
etc. that it might pass for a deed of King William, commonly called the
Conqueror; but, even supposing it to have been authentic, yet, as it was
neither published nor known till near 300 years after the death of William,
viz. not till the second year of King Richard II. anno 1378, the invalidity of
such an instrument, to alter the due process of the law, must be sufficiently
obvious: at the last-mentioned period, however, this pretended charter of
William was ENROLLED, it seems, FOR THE FIRST TIME, viz. in 2d Richard II.
"BEING NEVER HEARD OF BEFORE;" as Lord Coke remarks; (4 Inst. c. 83. p. 259.)
and the same learned author has produced ample proof from the Red Book before
quoted, that ECCLESIASTICAL CAUSES were handled in the TOURN, (the Sheriff's
CIRCUIT, or circular visitation of the HUNDREDS,) in the reign of Henry I. LONG
AFTER the said supposed charter. And certain it is, (says he,) that the Bishops
Consistories were erected, and causes ecclesiastical removed from the TOURN to
the Consistory, AFTER the making of the said Red Book: Ideo penes lectorem sit
judicium. It cannot, therefore, be denied, that this wicked, nay, I may justly
call it, diabolical, encroachment of the papal power on the most sacred rights
of the people was effected (like most other innovations of the apostate church)
by the help of an abominable LIE, -- by a FORGERY, so gross, and obviously
fraudulent and false, that the success of it cannot reasonably be attributed to
any other causes than ( first, with respect to the deceived) to that kind of
judicial blindness, which darkens the perceptions of all persons who neglect
the holy scriptures, and "receive not the love of the truth," after being
fairly warned, that, for this cause God shall send them strong delusion that
they should believe A LIE: (2 Thessalonians. ii. 11.) And (secondly, with respect to
the deceivers) it may fairly be attributed to the consequent prevalence of the
working of SATAN, with all power, and signs, and LYING wonders, and with ALL
DECEIVABLENESS of UNRIGHTEOUSNESS, etc. (2 Thessalonians. ii. 3 to 12.) a prevalence
and success which God permits in his just judgment against national
delinquency; for DECEIVABLENESS OF UNRIGHTEOUSNESS are terms so clearly
descriptive of the abovementioned abominable cheat against the RIGHTS of our
congregational Courts, that "the Father of lies" may well be deemed the first
suggester of it, as well as an active promoter: of its success; so that his
visible partners in the deceit, and their church, (the power of which, in this
kingdom, was then most essentially promoted by it,) must necessarily be
stigmatized by their share of labor and profit in so palpable a FRAUD: for as
" no LIE is of the truth," (1 John ii. 21.) "the deceivableness of
unrighteousness" beforementioned, and its baneful success, afford, as in many
other instances, (some of which I have exposed in my Declaration of the Peoples
Rights, p. 127 to 135; afford, I say,) an unquestionable token of their
apostasy from the King of righteousness, Shall the throne of iniquity have
fellowship with thee, which frames mischief by a law? (Ps. xciv. 20.) for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communication has
light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. vi. 14.15.
and of their consequent fellowship with the Prince of this World, -- "Why has
Satan filled thine heart to lie? etc. (Acts v. 3.) "for he is a lier and the
father of it." (John viii. 44.) -- "without" (i. e out of the pale of Christ's
Catholic Church,) are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and, WHOSOEVER LOVES AND MAKES A LIE. (Rev. xxii. 15.) -- SPEAKING
LIES IN HYPOCRISY, having their conscience seared with a hot iron; FOREIDDING
TO MARRY, to ABSTAIN FROM MEATS, etc. (1 Timothy iv. 1. to 5.) To enforce these
and such like "doctrines of Demons," (as they are expressly termed in this
text,) the abovementioned abominable FORGERY against the rights of our
congregational courts were manifestly devised and intended! Now lest the
severity of my expressions should give offense, instead of warning, to those
persons for whose service it was intended, I think it necessary to declare,
that my censure is not personal against the individuals of the Romish
persuasion, but against the profession itself, -- against the iniquity,
falsehoods, errors, and usurpations, of the PAPACY, (in the same manner that I
professed myself an enemy to STANDING ARMIES, without the least disrespect, or
breach of charity, toward the individuals incorporated therein. See the
Preface to my Declaration of the People's Rights, p. xxxvi.) I may fairly
except, however, such individuals as shall be duly convicted of wilfully
promoting forgeries and falsehood to prop the papal tyranny and delusion: but,
with respect to all other individuals of that church, who are not so directly
chargeable with "deceivableness of unrighteousness" in their profession, I am
bound not only to regard them with christian charity; but also (after so severe
a censure of their profession in general) freely to declare, that there are
many, very many, individuals among them, whose various good qualities and
virtues justly entitle them to my sincere esteem and respect; to such,
therefore, I can only add in the words of the Scripture -- Come out of her, my
people, (i. e. all ye that fear God; and the more especially as the period of
her power, the completion of the 1260 years of Roman tyranny, vested in ten, or
rather eleven, crowned Horns, is probably not far distant; all the prophetical
marks of her apostasy being evident so early as about the middle of the 6th
century,) that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues. For her SIN has reached unto Heaven, and God has remembered her
INIQUITIES! Rev. xviii. 4.5.
who "has nothing in Christ!" (John xiv. 30.)

By this miserable forgery, the courts of the congregation in England were
deprived of the presence and aid of their Bishops in public judgment, This
material branch of the Bishop's duty as a great popular magistrate is clearly
proved by Sir Henry Spelman. See "Reliquiae Spelmannianae," published by Bishop
Gibson, p. 76. -- It appears by Epiphanius, (says Sir Henry) that, in his
time, (as also many hundred years after,) Bishops and Clergymen did hear and
determine causes, lest Christians, against the rule of the Apostle, should go
to law under Heathens and Infidels. And it is said, in the first Epistle of
Clement, (if it were truly his,) that St. Peter himself did so appoint it. And
he previously, in the same chapter, cites a Canon that was ordained A. D. 517,
in concilio Taraconenfi, etc. That Nullus Episcopus vel infra positus, (or
official,) die Dominico causas judicare praesumat. That no Bishop or inferior
person presume to judge (or try) causes on the Lord's day. And, in page 116,
where he censures the Bishops of the eleventh and twelfth century, who affected
to get into their hands the secular power of counties, sheriffwics, and
constableships of castles, as -- " Walter, Bishop of Durham," (who,) having
bought the county of Northumberland of William the Conqueror, would needs sit
himself in the County Court; but paid dearly for it: for his countrymen
furiously slew him, even sitting there. Matt. Paris, in ann. 1075, and " Hugh,
Bishop of Coventry" (who) exercised the Sheriff's place, but was excommunicated
for it, as contra dignitatem Episc. and so acknowledged his error. Dicetus in
ann. 1190. To which he immediately adds -- But every one will say, it was a
common thing in old time for BISHOPS to be JUDGES in secular courts. I confess
it, (says Sir Henry,) and think it godly and lawful as it was used at the
first. For the Bishop and the Earl fat together in the County Court: the
Bishop, as Chancellor, to deliver Dei rectum and populum docere; the Earl, as
Secular Judge, to deliver rectum seculi and populum coercere; as is manifest by
the laws of King Edgar and others. But, when the Bishops began to supply both
places, and to be mere Judges of secular courts, then were they prohihited by
many Canons. This prohibition of the Canons, however, had generally a very
different object in view from the ostensible or pretended motive of their being
ordained. I speak of the later Canons. The ancient Canons confirmed the rights
of the CLERGY and PEOPLE in episcopal elections, marriage, etc. but some of the
later Canons, on the contrary, favored the encroachments of tyranny and papal
apostasy. In the ancient Canons (commonly called Apostolical) it is ordained,
that if any Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, etc. should abstain from MARRIAGE,
FLESH, and WINE, not on account of (religious) "DISCIPLINE," ((...) or
exercitation -- which was only (...) -- "for a time, that they might give
themselves to fasting and prayer," as allowed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. vii. 5;
under an express injunction that married persons should come together again,
lest Satan should tempt them, etc. through their (natural) "weakness;" it being
manifest that such mere temporary discipline is alone to be understood in this
place,) " but through DEFILEMENT, (...), (i. e. through pretense that marriage,
or meats, DEFILED the body,) forgetful that all things are exceeding good, and
that GOD made MAN, male and female, and (viz. by this doctrine of defilement)
blaspheming the Creator, either let him be REFORMED, ((...)) or let him be
deposed, etc. See Canon li. And the fifth Apostolical Canon also ordained that
a Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon, should not put away his wife on pretense of
religion, or piety, -- (...). But some of the later Canons, on the contrary,
invade the most natural rights of humanity. The Council of Carthage, held about
the time of Pope Caelestine, (A. D. 397,) Commanded Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, to hold chastity, and to abstain (ETIAM AB UXORIBUS) even from their
wives. See Howel's Synop. Canonum, p. 117. So the 12th Canon of the council,
held in Trullo of the Imperial Palace of Justinian the Second at
Constantinople, censures the Prelates of Africa and Libya, who after their
ordination did NOT refuse to live with their own proper wives, thereby (say the
infatuated authors of the Canon) " occasioning offense and scandal to the
people, etc." -- and therefore this Canon ordains "that the like" (i.e. men
living with their own proper married wives, (...)) should NOT by any means
after that time be done!!! And the learned Theodore Balsamon, Patriarch of
Antioch, in the twelfth century, cites several constitutions of the Emperor
Justinian the First, which were called (...), i.e. novellae, or novelties, (an
ominous title) -- which ordained that a man was not to be promoted to episcopal
dignity who has a wife or children, (...);" (a glaring opposition to the rules
laid down in scripture for the choice of a Bishop;) and again, "that Bishops
are to be deposed who dwell with a woman," -- (...). See the Paris Edition of
Balsamon's Commentary on the Canons, p. 373, 421, and 374. Thus the Authors of
some of the later Canons are marked with a manifest stain of apostasy, as men
infatuated and deluded by the wiles of Satan, who holds them "forth to open
shame," by the evidence of their own Canons, as teachers of "the doctrines of
Demons," viz. "forbidding to marry," (and commanding) "to abstain from meats,"
etc. of which devices and doctrines the Apostle has given express warning.
(See 1 Timothy iv. 1-6.) So that the almost universal prevalence of these open
marks of apostasy, throughout Christendom, against the express warning of holy
scripture, against the strictest cautions of the ancient apostolic Canons, and
even against nature itself, is so wonderfully extraordinary, that it would be
really incredible, were not the evidences of it, which still exist, notorious
and undeniable!!! The natural depravity of mankind tends not to such effects,
so that we can attribute it only to supernatural agents; and, though many of
the boasted monkish revelations were really mere human forgeries, yet I believe
that many others were real apparitions of seducing spirits, in order to hasten
the unnatural apostasy!
But, with respect to the present points, viz. the duty of Bishops to preside
in the congregational courts of common law, and the people's ancient right of
judging ecclesiastical causes therein, the learned SELDOM bears still more
ample testimony in his "Titles of Honor." P. 520. And the Scyregemot (which
was, says he, -- a court kept twice every year, as the Sheriffs turn is at this
day) was held by THE BISHOP of THE DIOCESE, and the EALDORMAN, (in shires that
had Ealdormen,) and by the BISHOPS and SHERIFFS, in such as were committed to
Sheriffs that were immediate to the King. And so (says he) both THE
ECCLESIASTICAL and TEMPORAL LAWS were TOGETHER given in charge to the country.
The authorities cited by Mr. Seldon for this are as follow: -- Videsis Leg.
Edgar, cap. 5. et not. ad Edmer. page 166 and 167. Historiam nostram de
decimis, cap. 14. 1. et Leg. Canut. cap. 17. Lambard. Sir Edward Coke has also
cited the laws of Edgar to the same purpose in his second Institute, p. 70,
viz. -- Celeberrimus est omni Satrapia his quotannis conventus agitor, cui
quidem ILLIUS DIOECESIS EPISCOPUS, et Senator intersunto, quorum alter JURA
DIVINA, alter humana populum edoceto; which also agrees (says he) with Magna
Charta, and other statutes and continual usage. By that which has been said,
it appears (continues Sir Edward Coke) that the law, made by King Henry I.
was (after the great heat of the conquest was past) but a restitution of the
ancient law of England: and forasmuch as the BISHOP with the Sheriff did go in
circuit twice every year by EVERY HUNDRED within the county, etc.
a presence and aid of the utmost importance to the welfare of the people and
of the whole commonwealth, whilst the people retained any share of their just
and ancient right in the election of Bishops, but little to be regretted, when
the Bishops, through the total perversion of that right, (by the gradual
encroachments of monks, popes, and kings,) ceased to have that intimate
connection with the people and their interest, which their predecessors in
office were wont to acquire so naturally by popular elections. But the later
Bishops, chosen by the usurpers of episcopal elections for very different
purposes, and selected, for the most part, from the monastic orders, then
falsely called regular, (instead of the regular parochial priesthood,) did as
naturally become the dangerous advocates for very different interests, the
interests of their usurping constituents, whether monkish or monarchical; and,
more especially, about the time of Richard II. when the notorious forgery
abovementioned was committed.

The courts of the congregation were also, by this detestable forgery, cheated
of the power of excommunicating irreligious and profane persons from their own
body or society; a power most essentially their own, but which, lodged where it
is at present, merely with the Bishops of a reformed Church, (who want it not
for undue purposes like the papal prelates,) neither promotes episcopal dignity
nor due ecclesiastical authority; because ecclesiastical judgments and
censures, by flowing in an improper channel, have excited, and ever will
excite, the jealousy of the people; and, of course, they have been generally
thwarted and opposed in our courts of common law, (through a just jealousy, in
the courts, of the Bishop's separate consistories,) and have sometimes been
reversed and annulled with heavy costs and damages against the ecclesiastical
judge, or, perhaps, (what is worse,) against his executors and innocent family
after his death; by which means, the necessary control of vice and immorality
is weakened, and ecclesiastical censures, howsoever just and proper in
themselves, are but too little regarded by rich and opulent offenders that can
spare money for litigation; so that the public is grievously injured by
infectious examples of depravity without any effectual means of restraining
them. But, it would be far otherwise, if the congregational courts were
restored to their ancient powers of acting by the common law, with cognizance
of all causes, ecclesiastical as well as civil, which formerly they enjoyed, as
I have already proved. For as law was deemed the dictate of reason, "Lex est
dictamen rationis." Jenk. Cent. p. 117.
and "reason" justly deemed a ray of the divine light, "Ratio est radius divini
luminis." Co. Lit. 232. b.
common to all men of common sense, as being derived and inherited from our
first common parents, so it followed, of course, that, though many express laws
for particular occasions and likewise various customs and usages, proved by
legal precedents, formed a part of our common law, (of which the reverend sages
of the law and regular students were, undoubtedly, the properest judges,
insomuch that the business of the courts could not be carried on without their
assistance,) yet by far the greatest and most essential part of the common law
consisted in the exercise of reason, duly to discern between good and evil,
between right and wrong, between justice and injustice, in all cases
whatsoever, by the general principles of natural right, See the 1st, 2d, 5th,
and 8th, chapters of Doctor and Student.
and by those also which may be drawn from God's Revelation in the Holy
Scriptures, which is declared to be the second foundation of our law. See
Doctor and Student, chaprs 3 and 6.


And, as the members of a christian community are required by the Scriptures to
have their senses exercised, through HABIT (...). Heb. V. 14.
or use, to discern both good and evil, -- such assemblies, with the assistance
of the sages and regular students of the law, were surely competent to
determine whether any offense complained of, or presented to them, was really
either immoral in itself, or a nuisance, in any respect, to the community; and,
in either case, the LAW will find a remedy, "Lex semper dabit remedium." Prin.
Leg. et Aeq p. 52.
be the particular circumstances of the case ever so new or uncommon; for
justice "Lex deficere non debet in justitia exhibenda." Jenk. Cent. p. 4.
Justitia non est neganda non differenda. Jenk. Cent. p. 93 and 129. -- Nemini
neganda est. Ib. 176. Interest reipublicae ne maleficia remaneant impunita. Ib.
31, 117, and 223. "Law will not suffer wrong." Grounds and Rudiments, p. 188.
ought not to be foiled for the want of an express statute, or a precedent for
proceeding, as at present; Justice indeed, even at present, does not fail for
want of laws, but, rather, by having too many; for our Acts of Parliament have
been multiplied of late years to an excess that is almost destructive of their
end; excessive, as well in number, as in tedious prolixity; for, by neglect of
the common law, men are apt to conceive that they have no remedy for abuses but
statute making, so that the number of our Acts of Parliament is annually
increased, though the difficulty of understanding and retaining them in memory
regularly increases with the unweildy bulk of the collection, and thereby
renders them more favorable to evasion and impunity than to justice and right,
more profitable to the venal talents of perverting orators, than effectual for
the correction of manners. Hence arise the difficulty, the uncertainty, and the
intolerable expense, of obtaining justice, whereby prudent men are frequently
induced rather to lose their right than to risque the expense of defending it
in the ordinary course of justice; and violent men, on the other hand, are
prompted, by the difficulty of obtaining justice, to revenge their own quarrels
with their own hands! Hence duelling, bloodshed, and murder! which are still
farther encouraged by the corrupt, modern, practice of the courts, in laying
aside the ancient, legal, discrimination between manslaughter and murder, as I
have shown at large in a distinct tract on that subject, printed several years
ago, (in 1773,) and then sent to all the judges; but it has not been in the
least regarded, though I have never had reason to apprehend any error in the
performance, none having yet ever been pointed out, and the modern prevalence
of duelling proves that the ancient doctrine and discipline of the courts
(which alone I have asserted) was certainly right and necessary to be restored.
but the law is required to be effective Law will rather suffer things against
the principles of law than that a man shall be without a remedy. Grounds and
Rudiments, p. 188.
, and all men, however great, were made to regard it by amerciaments, or
mulcts, in proportion as well to the crime as to the wealth or substance of the
offender; the contenement of the land owner being duly considered, the
merchandise of the merchant, and the waynage of the husbandman. (See magna
Charta, cap. 14.)

There is no possible case, either of immorality or even inconvenience, but
what is within the reach and correction of the COMMON LAW; for, it is a rule
therein, that " nothing which is against REASON is lawful; "Nihil quod est
contra rationem est licitum." Co. Lit. 97, b. and Grounds and Rudiments, 228.
and, surely, every thing that is immoral is "against reason;" and again, by
another rule, nothing that is inconvenient is lawful. "Nihil quod est
inconveniens est licitum." Co. Lit. 97, b. and Grounds and Rudiments, 228.
And ecclesiastical cases were also particularly regarded by it; because,
whatever things related to the advancement of religion were, in law, deemed of
the highest consideration; " Summa ratio est quae PRO RELIGIONE facit." Jenk.
Cent. p. 2. et 37. Noy, p. 1. Grounds and Rudiments, p. 318.
so that, if the congregational courts were duly reformed and re-established,
the jurisdiction and cognizance of all ecclesiastical cases therein, according
to ancient usage, would not only promore morality, but also, by strengthening
ecclesiastical discipline, would really enlarge the authority and dignity of
EPISCOPACY; and if, to this, the clergy and people were also re-instated in
their ancient right, as Christians, freely to elect their own Bishops, [duly
observing the scriptural precautions against party divisions and tumults, viz.
First, to elect two unexceptionable or blameless (...), (1 Timothy 3, 2.) Quorum
vitam carpere nemo jure potest; or (...), (Tit. 1, 7.) Inculpati.
presbyters by the common suffrage of all the people See the mode, as well as
the popular right, of episcopal elections more fully stated in my Tract on the
Law of Retribution, p. 331 to 339. I have there proved, (I hope,) that the
election of Mathias, to the dignity of an APOSTLE, was, at the same time, a
precedent for elections to the office of A BISHOP; and, that the
unexceptionable apostolic mode of election, described in Acts i. 15-26. was
disused, indeed, during the time that the apostles themselves administered the
affairs of the church, after the great day of Pentecost, when the promises,
respecting the gift of the HOLY SPIRIT, were visibly accomplished, and, during
the continuance of the outward and extraordinary tokens of that glorious gift,
whereby the apostles manifested their authority to APPOINT BISHOPS without the
formulary PRECAUTIONS of the first precedent; but that these just and equitable
PRECAUTIONS became once more desirable as soon as the extraordinary gifts of
the Holy Spirit (I mean only the outward manifestation of apostolic power)
ceased in the Church, when the primitive mode of electing TWO unexceptionable
presbyters by the people, and referring the appointment of ONE of them to the
providence of God, by the decision of the lot, according to the excellent
precedent recorded in Holy Scripture, was again revived in several places, as
being best suited to the ordinary state of the church in all succeeding ages,
for which I referred to examples testified by good authority; in addition to
which I have lately discovered (amongst the valuable MS. collections of the
very learned Dr. Tho Mangey, formerly prebendary of Durham, which, by the
Favor of his worthy son, the late Rev. Mr. John Mangey, my affectionate
relation, are now in my possession) a reference to the council of Barcelona,
held in the Year of Christ 599, wherein the re-establishment of that most
cautious and unexceptionable mode of popular e^ections was expressly decreed by
the bishops of a very considerable providence " Tarraconesis provinciae
episcopi in urbem Barcinonensem, etc."
in Spain, (Tarragonia;) and, by them enjoined as a perpetual usage, on the
penalty of deposition, solemnly denounced against all persons that should
presume to act otherwise, in future, whether the ordainers of bishops or the
ordained. See the 3d chapter of that council; -- wherein, after reciting some
of the necessary qualifications to render a man eligible to the dignity of a
bishop, they add -- ita tamen, ut DUOBUS, aut TRIBUS, quos ante CONSENSUS CLERI
et PLEBIS ELEGERIT, metropolitani judicio ejusque co episcopis proesentatio,
quem SORS, proeeunte episcoporum jejunio, CHRISTO DOMINO TERMINANTE,
MONSTRAVERIT, benedictio consecrationis accumulet. Aliter deinceps, quod absit,
proesumptum, et ORDINATORES et ORDINATOS proprii honoris DEPOSITIO subsequatur.
And this was ordained even where kingly power was established, as appears by
the title. Consilium Barcinonense, era DC.XXXVII. anno XIV. REGIS RECCAREDI,
anno Christi DXCIX. habitum. See Sacrosancta Consilia, Tom. V. Paris Edition,
1671.
or congregation, (or, at least, of all the episcopal communicants in each
diocese that should demand their right of suffrage,) and then, after solemn
prayer, to decide BY LOT, before God and the congregation, the appointment of
one of the elected presbyters, according to the authentic precedent described
in Acts i. 15 to 26. the bishops would obtain such a natural connection with
the people, as great popular officers, (which they would really be by a popular
election, truly ecclesiastical, in the true sense of the word ecclesia, or
congregation, the surest foundation for popular respect and authority,) in
addition to their proper dignity, as being of the highest order of God's
ministers in religion, that they would effectually become what the Common Law
entitles them, viz. (not merely "robur ecclesiae," the strength of the church,
but in a more enlarged sense of the word ecclesia, including our whole national
community, or commonwealth, of Christians,) "ROBUR REIPUBLICAE," the strength
of the commonwealth. "Ordo Episcoporum est Robur Reipublicae." Jenk. Cent. p.
56. viz. The order of Bishops is the strength (force or hability) "of the
commonwealth." But, in order to render this maxim obvious and unquestionable,
we must necessarily imply and include, in the episcopal function, that very
important branch of it already mentioned, viz. the presiding as chief popular
magistrates in the congregational courts of common law; See also Leges Edgari
Regis, No 5, and Leges Canuti Regis, No 17. (de Comitus,) wherein the Bishop is
expressly required to attend the Sbyre-gemot, "and thaer teacan ge Gods Ribt,"
and there teach the Divine Law. So that the Bishop's attendance in the
Shire-parliaments, (twice every year,) as well as in national Parliaments, is
built on the very foundation of the English constitution.
and we must also suppose the continuance or re-establishment of the primitive
Christian freedom in episcopal elections; that the Bishops, by real popular
elections, may be truly popular magistrates, worthy to be entrusted with the
civil as well as the ecclesiastical INTERESTS of the commonwealth. Mr. Sadler,
in his "Rights of the Kingdom," speaking of the time of King Henry II. says, --
It seems considerable, how all historians (of that time and dispute) do
record, THE CHOICE OF BISHOPS to be in the PEOPLE: in PLEBE and in POPULO, as
well as in CLERO. They mention RADULPH, ordained a Bishop for the Oreades: but
rejected by all, because not elected by COMMON ASSENT of the PEOPLE; PLEBIS,
CLERO, PRINCIPIS, it is every where in the old Monks; and how the poor Bishop
wandered up and down, as an assistant to other Prelates, etc. See p. 235, and
more instances also at p. 243. The learned author of a Tract, (printed several
years ago, as appears by the lift of Tracts published at the same time, but
without a date,) entitled, Lex Parliamentaria, or a Treatise of the Law and
Custom of Parliament, etc. has cited various proofs of the People's right to
elect Bishops. -- That for some years, (says he,) after this new charter
granted in this English Parliament, (meaning a Parliament held at London by
King Henry I.) the PEOPLE were generally RESTORED to the right of electing
their own magistrates and officers, civil, military, and ECCLESIASTICAL; and
this (says the learned author) I take to be the grand foundation of the MAGNA
CHARTA of ENGLISH LIBERTIES, i. e. as it gave relaxation from NORMAN tyranny
and slavery. And this may teach us, that the rights and liberties of the
Commons of ENGLAND are neither so illegally begotten as by rebellion, nor of
such tender years as some imagine. etc. p. 42 The continuation of the evidence,
which I have collected on this head, would take up too much room to be inserted
in a note, and therefore I propose to resume the subject in a distinct Tract at
the end of this publication.
And, though these ancient congregational courts have unhappily fallen into
disuse, yet the law had duly provided for their continuance by establishing an
annual court, called the View of Frankpledge, wherein the association and due
arrangement of the whole body of the people, in their proper decinal divisions,
were intended to be completed and renewed, one of the constant articles of
enquiry being, whether the decenaries were complete. Et fiant Visus de
Franco-plegio, sic quod pax inviolabiliter observetur, et quod DECENNAE
INTEGRAE SINT, sicut tempore Henrici Regis praedicti esse consueverunt. Fleta,
lib. 2. c. 52.

Fleta in this chapter expressly quotes Magna Charta, and gives a transcript of
the 35th chapter of it, word for word, with very little variation, except what
may enable us to correct the common printed copies of that noble charter,
wherein we frequently find the word "trithinga" inserted instead of tithinga,
the proper word, which is manifest from the various reading in Fleta of the
same import, though in the plural number, viz. "decennae," i. e. tithings. The
English version, commonly printed in the Statute Books, has also, indeed, the
word "trything" instead of tithing; and Sir Edward Coke, in his commentary on
that chapter, calls the word three or four times "trithinga" though he has
copied it right in the chapter itself. (See his 2d Inst. p. 69.) -- et quod
TITHINGA teneatur integra sicut esse consuevit, etc. -- and let the TITHING be
kept entire as it has been accustomed to be. I have a copy of Magna Charta,
printed for the Stationers Company in 1618, which has the same true reading --
et quod TITHINGA teneatur integra, etc. and this reading is still farther
proved by Sir Edward Coke's commentary upon it; trithinga, or tithinga, (says
he,) is expounded for theothinga, which signifies the Frankpledge of ten
households, etc. It is manifest therefore that the maintaining the tithings
entire is expressly ordained by Magna Charta; so that we have statute law, (the
most respectable statute that was ever made,) as well as common law, to justify
the re-establishment of the tithings throughout the kingdom without having the
least need to make a new act for that purpose. It is already the law, and the
sheriffs and other magistrates, who do not enforce it, by holding the annual
view of Frankpledge for the legal purpose of maintaining the tithings entire,
as directed by Magna Charta, are certainly deficient in their duty, and ought
to be duly amerced by the crown for their neglect of the most beneficial law,
both to the king and people, that was ever made; and, the more especially ought
they to be amerced, if any riots or notorious robberies shall have happened
within their respective jurisdictions, during the time of their being in
office, because these, in all human probability, would have been prevented, as
well as the damages occasioned by them, had the sheriffs done their duty in
completing the tithings, at an annual View of Frankpledge, as the law directs.
See the whole chapter concerning the View of Frankpledge and other popular
Courts, as inserted in the common statute books, 9. Henrici III. cap. 35. No
COUNTY COURT from henceforth shall be holden, but from month to month; and
where greater time has been used, there shall be greater: nor any sheriff or
his bailiff shall keep his turn in the HUNDRED, but twice in the year: and no
where but in due place and accustomed, that is to say, once after Easter, and
again after the Feast of Saint Michael. And the View of FRANKPLEDGE shall be
likewise at the Feast of Saint Michael without occasion. So that every man may
have his liberties, which he had, or used to have in the time of King Henry our
grandfather, or which he has purchased since. The View of FRANKPLEDGE shall be
so done that our peace may be kept. And that the TRYTHING (for TITHING, as I
have already proved) may be wholly kept, (or, rather, be kept entire, or
complete, which may easily be done, by means of the annual View of
Frankpledge,) as it has been accustomed. And that the sheriff seek no
occasions, and that he be content with so much as the sheriff was wont to have
for his viewmaking in the time of King Henry our grandfather. And perhaps the
sheriff's fees for this "view-making" would be the only part of the business of
re-establishing the tithings that would need some new regulation.

The account of Frankpledge, given in Dr. Cowell's Interpreter, is worthy of
being recited at length for the sake of those who cannot have recourse to that
work.

Frankpledge (Franciplegium) is compounded (says he) of Franc, (i. e. liber,)
and pleige, (i. e. fidejussor,) and signifies, in our common law, a pledge, or
surety, for freemen. For the ancient custom of England, for the preservation
of the public peace, was that every freeborn man, at fourteen years of
age, after Bracton, (religious persons, clerks, knights, and their eldest
sons excepted,) should find surety for his truth toward the king and his
subjects, or else be kept in prison, Mr. Lambard also mentions this custom of
imprisoning those that could not find surety. See his Tract on "the Duties of
Constables," p. 7 and 8. I will recite his words, beginning with the preceding
paragraph, for the sake of more fully explaining the nature of pledges as well
as their association in tithing and hundred courts. After mentioning the cause
of associating in tithing or decenary companies, viz. -- for the better
repressing of thieves and robbers, he adds, these companies be yet in some
places of England, (and namely with us in Kent,) called BOROES, of the said
word BORHES, pledges or SUERTIE: albeit in the Western parts of the realm
they be commonly named TYTHINGS, because they contain (as I told you) the
number of TEN MEN with their families. And even as ten times ten do make
an HUNDRED, so, because it was then also appointed that TEN OF THESE
COMPANIES should at certain times (every three weeks "Le Hundred Court poit
estre tenus ebescun trois semaignes." See Crompton's " Authority et
Jurisdiction des Courts, etc." p. 231. In ancient times the Hundred Court was
held every fifteen days; -- de Quindena in Quindenam; -- or once in a
fortnight, but was afterward altered, by a resolution of parliament, (to clear
up some doubts concerning the 35th chapter of Magna Charta,) in the reign of
Henry III. to the time abovementioned, viz. de tribus septimanis in tres
septimanas, ubi prius teneri solent de Quindena in Quindenam, etc. See Mr.
Prynne's Brief Animadversions, etc. on the fourth part of the Institutes, p.
189 and 190.
) meet together for their matters of greater weight, therefore that general
assembly (or court) was (and yet is) called a HUNDRED. Furthermore it was then
also ordained that if any man were of so evil credit, that he could not get
himself to be received into one of these tythings or boroes, that then he
should be shut up in prison as a man unworthie to live at liberty amongst men
abroad.
whereupon a certain number of neighbors became customably bound one for
another, to see each man of their pledge forth-comming at all times, or to
answer the transgression committed by any broken away. So that whosoever
offended, it was forthwith inquired in what pledge he was, and then they of
that pledge either brought him forth within 31 days to his answer, or
satisfied for his offense. This was called Frank-pledge, causa qua supra, and
the circuit thereof was called decenna, because it commonly consisted of 10
households: and every particular person thus mutually bound for himself and
his neighbors was called decennier, because he was of one decenna or another:
This custom was so kept, that the sheriffs, at every county court, did, from
time to time, take the oaths of young ones as they grew to the age of 14
years, and see, that he were combined in one dozen or another: whereupon this
branch of the sheriffe's authority was called VISUS FRANCIPLEGII, View of
Frankpledge. See the Statute What Dr. Cowel here calls a "Statute," is printed,
indeed, under that title in the common Statute Book; but it has not, in the
least respect, the form of a Statute, nor does it appear to be, in reality, any
thing more than what the Honorable Mr. Justice Barrington has conjectured, i.
e. " This supposed Statute likewise (says he, referring to what he had before
said of the preceding nominal Statute, viz. This is most clearly no Statute,
but only an entry made in the commonplace of some Lawyer, etc.) "seems to have
been taken," (says he,) as well as the preceding one, from the notes or
commonplace of some lawyer, who had occasion to hold a court of Frank-pledge,
etc. It contains, indeed, most of the usual articles of enquiry for a court of
Frankpledge; but I must remark that the 4th and 5th articles contain a gross
perversion of the ancient articles of enquiry concerning vagrants, viz.
Vagrants, of whom there was any praesumption, or suspicion, of evil, etc. for
this necessary object of enquiry is here perverted and altered to serve the
purposes of a most detestable oppression, Villenage, to bring poor laborers
under the usurped authority of the great Lords and land-owners as appendages to
their estates and mere private property! Happily therefore it is no Statute! I
have a copy, nevertheless, of this false Statute, printed in the year 1529,
(the 20. Henry VIII. only a little time before the reformation.) when the whole
bulk of all the Statutes at large was contained in a very small pocket-volume,
little more than half the size of my hand, so that this important book was
hardly big enough, in respect of its size, to be deemed even a manual, though
it bears in its title page the extraordinary character of containing more
Statutes than ever was imprynted in any one book before this time; and yet,
even then, it contained, it seems, some things, falsely called Statutes, that
ought not to have been there. I wish the many weighty folios were once more
reduced to a single manual!
The proper articles of enquiry may be found in Fleta, lib. ii. cap. 52. I must
acknowledge, however, that this chapter contains some articles of enquiry
favorable to the abominable oppression of villenage, but they are distinct
articles from that respecting vagrants, and as villenage is now abolished there
can be no occasion to recite them.
for VIEW OF FRANPLEDGE, made anno 18. Ed. 2. See Decennier, From this head I
have already, in the former part of the work, extracted what seemed to be most
necessary.
Leete, LEETE, (Leta,) is otherwise called a LAW-DAY. SMITH de Republ. Anglor.
lib. ii. cap. 18. The word seems to have grown from the Saxon, (LETHE,)
which, as appears from the laws of King EDWARD, set out by M. LAMBERD, number.
34. was a court of jurisdiction above the WAPENTAKE or HUNDRED, In the
preceding Law of King Edward, No 33, the Wapentac is expressly declared to be
the same Court as the Hundred Court, -- quod Angli vocant Hundredum, supradicti
comitatus vocant Wappentachium:" and that it is so named from the salute
usually paid to the chief of that court, (i. e. the High-Constable or
Hundreder,) by touching his spear with their weapons, or lances, in token of
confirmation, ( taccare, confirmare,) but, more expressly according to the
English tongue, we call it (says the Law) WAPEN-TAC; armorum tactus est, Wepnn
enim arma sonat, tac tactus est.
comprehending THREE or FOUR of them, otherwise called THRYHING, [in the said
law, as published by Mr. Lambert, it is also called TRIHINGE, Lex 34. Edwardi
Regis -- Tit. De Trihingis et Ledis. Erant etiam et aliae potestates super
Wapentachia, quas vocabant THRIHINGAS, qued erat tertia pars provinciae. Qui
vero super eas dominabantur, vocabantur THRIHINGEREPAS, ad hos defere bantur
causae quae non poterant definiri in Wapentachiis. Sicque, quod Angli vocabant
Hundredum, isti Wapentachium, et, quod Anglice vocabant 3 vel 4 Hundreda, isti
vocabant THRIHINGA. In quibusdam vero provinciis Anglice vocabantur LETH quod
isti dicunt TRIHINGE. Quod autem in THRIHINGE definiri non poterat, ferebatur
in SCYRAM, i. e. to the County Court.
LEDA, and LETH,] and contained the third part of a province or shire. These
jurisdictions, one and other, be now ABOLISHED, (this, however, is not true;
they were never abolished though fallen into disuse; they are so far from being
abolished that the use of them is not only, at this time, legal, but really
required by law, so that no new law is necessary for their revival, as I have
already shown,) and swallowed up in the County Court (but the County Court
itself is so far fallen, also, into disuse, through a necessary consequence of
neglecting the Hundreds (or Wapentaks) and the Trithings, that it seems, as
much as the latter, to have lost its ancient importance, which was that of a
COUNTY PARLIAMENT, competent for all business (bridges, turnpikes, regulations
of Commons, goals, workhouses, etc.) within each county respectively, business
with which at present the great national council is clogged and pestered, and
the sessions prolonged, instead of being dispatched in the proper County Courts
where the truth of the allegations for changes and new regulations would best
be known and ascertained] except they be hold by prescription. Kitchen, fol. 6,
or charter in the nature of a franchise, as I have said in (HUNDRED.) The
liberty of HUNDREDS is rare, but many Lords, together with their Courts Baron,
have likewise Leetes adjoined and thereby do enquire of such transgressions as
are subject to the inquiry and correction of this Court: whereof you may read
your fill in KITCHEN, from the beginning of his book to the fifth chapter, and
BRITON, cap. 28. But this Court, in whose manor soever it be kept, is
accounted the KING'S COURT, because the authority thereof is originally
belonging to the Crown, and thence derived to inferior persons, KITCHEN, fol.
6. Justice DYER says, that this Leete was first derived from the sheriffs
TURN, fol. 64. And it enquired of all offenses under high treason, committed
against the Crown and dignity of the King; though it cannot punish many, but
must certify them to the Justices of the Assise, PER STATUT. ANNO 1. ED. 3.
CAP. ULT. KITCHEN, f. 8. But what things be only inquirable, and what
punishable, see KITCHEN in the charge of a Court-Leete, fo. 8-20. See also the
Statute, ANNO 8. ED. 2. The jurisdiction of bayliffes in the duchy of
Normandy, within the compass of their provinces seems to be the same, or
very mare the same, with the power of our Leete, cap. 4. of the grand Custumary.
View of Frankpledge, and Freoborghe. That this discipline is borrowed by us of
the Roman Emperors, or rather Lombards, appears most manifestly in the 2d
book of Feuds, cap. 53, upon which, if you read Hotoman with those authors
that he there records, you will think your labor well bestowed. Read more
of this, viz. what ARTICLES were wont to be inquired of in this court, in
Horne's Mirror of Justices, lib. 1. cap. de la veneu des francs pleges, and
what these articles were in ancient times, see in Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 52.

The title in Horn's Mirror is not, as Dr. Cowell has said, "De la venue,"
etc. but "De Viewes de Franckpledge." See chap. i. sect. xvii. This chapter
contains many things worthy to be known, and which also relate particularly to
the subject of this book, and therefore I think myself obliged to recite it for
the sake of those who have not a copy of the original. In doing this, however,
I propose to follow the common English translation, printed in 1646, making
such alterations as a comparison with the French copy, printed in 1642, may
seem to require.

Of Viewes of Franck-pledge. This word is plural in the old English translation
but not in the French copy. Chap. 1. Sect. xvii. De Viewes de Franckpledge.

De celles assemblies primiers estoit aussi ordain que chescun Hundredor fait
common assemble un foits per an, et nemy solement d' fief tenants mes d' touts
del hundred estrangers et Denizens d' xii ans ensuis forsprise Archevesques,
Evesques, Abbes, Priors, et touts gents d' Religion, et tou^s Clerks,
Countees, Barons, et Chivalers, Femmes epouses, Sourdes et Mutes, Malades, Fols
naistres (Idiots, or Naturals as they are sometimes called) et Meseaux, et Ceux
que (for qui) sont ailors en dezein, pur enquirer des points avaunt dits, et des
ARTICLES suivants, et nemy per SERFS [a i. e. the laboring Poor, enslaved
through the oppression, pride, and injustice, of the rich Landholders, by whom
they were called "Serfs," i. e. Servi, Slaves; but God will avenge ((...)) the
cause of the oppressed and the right of the poor. (Psa. cxl. 12.) He will save
the oppressed poor, BUT WILL BRING DOWN HIGH LOOKS. (Psa. xviii. 27.) And he
that oppresses ((...)) "shall receive" i. e. retribution "for the oppression
which he has done, and there is" (with God) "NO RESPECT OF PERSONS." Col. iii.
25.] " ne per FEMES" [b i. e. the "averement," verdict, or judgment, was not
to be found by women, though they might undoubtedly be witnesses, and give
information to the Court to assist the "averement:" and, by the express
exemption (but not exclusion) of married women, "femmes espouses," it seems as
if the attendance was required of all other women not so exempted, viz. the
unmarried, who, surely, may be included in the general term -- d' touts del
Hundred, "of all persons within the Hundred," -- especially as their attendance
to hear the charge concerning the several legal ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY would
enable them more effectually to promote, by their influence, that love of right
and justice, for which the virtuous part of the sex are most eminently
distinguished; and their better knowledge of the Common Law would enable them
sometimes, perhaps, to prevent the breach of it, but, at all times, enable them
to aid it by true and candid information in behalf of RIGHT] " mes per les
AFFEREMENT d' xii. Frank homes al meins" (c the translator has unluckily
omitted this most material circumstance concerning " a Jury of TWELVE at the
least") car Serf [d there are now no Serfs (God be thanked!) in England, though
a strenuous attempt was made some years ago to engraft the detestable
West-Indian slavery on the old rotten stock of villenage, which it pleased God
to enable me to cut up by the roots, contrary to my own expectation or even
hope, being at that time utterly ignorant of law, having never till then opened
a single book of it, but I was compelled by a particular unforeseen
circumstance to search the books in mere self defense! But though there are now
no Serfs, yet the doctrine of this article holds good with respect to all
persons under confinement, or sentence, or charge, for crimes, who are to be
deemed hondmen (though not Serfs or private property) till they are enlarged]
ne poit null Frank-home [e and every man, not charged with crimes, is to be
deemed a freeman] enditer ne null auter qui u'est resceivable a suite fair en
mesme les Courts. [f In the Old Version it is rendered inferious Courts: the
translator probably supposed the true reading to be mes'n, or menues, mien,
little or inferior Courts.] Et pur ceo que ordeine fuit auncientment que null ne
denuorast (probably for demeurat) en le royalme s'il ne soit en DIZEIN; et
plevy de Frankhomes; appent aux HUNDREDORS d'viewer [g in the Old Version it is
rendered to shew] un foits per le an les Frankpledges, et le plevies; [h in the
Old Version rendered pledgers; but the Frankpledges themselves are the
pledgers, who pledge, not only each other, but also all the lodgers,
journeymen, servants, etc. that are not housekeepers in each Tithing, and these
latter are properly the plevies or pledged, and are so distinguished from the
10 FRANKPLEDGES or DECINERS;] et pur ceo sont tiels views appelles views d'
Frankpledge.

"Les Articles son ceux." (l The Articles are suitable ^o Court Leetes as well
as Views of Frankpledge: they are the principal heads or topics of enquiry to
be mentioned in the charge of the Hundreder, or Chief of the Court, to the
Jury.)


Of these first assemblies it was also ordained, that every Hundred-er do make
a common meeting once in the year, and "not only of the Freeholders," (or
Fieftenants,) but of all persons within the Hundred, strangers and denizens of
the age of 12 years and upwards, except of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, and all religious persons, and all clerks, (Clergy,) Earls, Barons,
and Knights, Feme Coverts, (rather married women,) "deaf" and dumb, sick,
idiots, infected persons, and those who are not in any Dozien, (rather -- and
those who are elsewhere included in a Decenary -- for that is the proper
exception intended,) to enquire quire of the points aforesaid, and of the
articles following, and not by villainies, (meaning villeins or bondmen, a) nor
by women, b but by the afferment or verdict of TWELVEc Freemen at the least;
for a villain (meaning a villein, i. e. a bondsman or serfd) cannot indict a
Freeman,e nor any other who is not receiveable to do suite in the samef "
Courts, and therefore it was anciently ordained, that none should remain in the
realm if he were not in some Decenny (or Tithing) and pledge-ed of Freemen: it
belongs also to HUNDREDOURS (the chiefs of Hundreds, who are High-Constables)
"once a year to" viewg the Frankpledges, and the pledg-ed,h and therefore are
the viewes called the View of Frankpledges; or rather, and for this are such
viewes called the Views of Frankpledge.

"The Articlesi are these."

1. 1. Vous nous dires par vous serements si tres tous sont qui la devoient
venir a la jornee.
By the oaths you have taken, you shall declare whether all they, who ought, do
appear or not. In the supposed Statute of 18th Edward II. beforementioned, the
first article is, -- You shall say unto us, by the oath that you have made, if
all the JURORS that owe suit to this Court be come, and which not. In both
copies the presence of the JURY is necessarily to be understood, as appears by
the mention of their oaths, and of course we must suppose a previous summons or
impannel, to be the foundation of the business, so that it now seems a very
proper question to begin with, as well at Views of Frankpledge as at all other
Court-Leets or Trithings, and, likewise, at HundredCourts, viz. If all the
JURORS be come, etc. and which not. -- That the absentees may be duly amerced
if they cannot assign a legal essoine or admissible excuse.

2. 2. "Si touts les Franks" (k Franks in ancient times were mentioned in
contradistinction to Serfs, but, as villenage is now abolished, all men of
every rank and degree are to be deemed Franks or Freemen in the Congregational
Courts) des Hundreds ou del fief sont present.
If all the Free-menk of the HUNDRED, or of the Fee, (Fief or Manor,) "be
present."

3. 3. Si touts les Frankpledges eient lour Dozeins entiers. Et touts ceux que
ils ont plevies. (l This interpretation answers to No 5, in Fleta's 52 chap.
lib. 2. which I believe to be the true reading, instead of Frankpledges. -- Si
omnes CAPITALES PLEGII venerint sicuti venire debent, et si DECENNAS suas
habuerint. See also the supposed Statute of 18th Edward II. No 2. If all the
CHIEF PLEDGES, or their Dozens be come, as they ought to come, and which not.)
"If all the Frankpledges" (or, rather, the Chief Pledges,l Tithingmen or
Headboroughs) "have their Doziens" (Decenaries or Tythings) "entire," (or
complete,) "and all those" whom they have pledged.

4. 4. Si tres touts ceux del Hundred ou del fief d' xii. ans ensuis sint jure
fealty al roy, et de resceivors d'autres escient. (mTo tender the oaths of
allegiance to boys of 12 or even 14 years of age seems very exceptionable, and
therefore I am happy to find that this does not seem to have been originally
intended to be required, for by the copy of this article in Fleta, all that is
required of such very young persons is their being entered and pledged in some
Decenary. -- Item si omnes duodecim annorum et ultra sint in Decenna. --
Enquiry should also be made whether all persons of that age attended the View
of Frankpledge as they ought. See Fleta, No 8. Item si omnes DUODECIM ANNORUM
et ultra venerint sicut debuerint. This corresponds with the 3d Article of the
supposed Statute of 18th Edward II. as expressed in my old Edition of 1529. Et
si toutz de DOUZE ANS sont en l'assise nostre seigneur le roy et queux ne sont
mye, et qui les resceite. Which is falsely rendered in the common version, viz.
And if all the DOZEINS (instead of all DE DOUZE ANS or of 12 years) "be in the
assize of our Lord the King," (the View of Frankpledge being that assise, -- EO
QUOD DIES REGIS EST, because it is the King's day, as Fleta says, (No 36,) "et
in favorem pacis fuit inventus,") "and which not, and who received them," i. e.
in what households are they lodged: nand the remaining part of the article is
also better explained in Fleta concerning "Receivers of others" by another
distinct article, (No 7,) De hiis qui non sunt in DECENNA, qui fuerint CLERICI,
qui MILITES, qui forisfamulaverint, et qui alii, et de quorum manupastu
fuerint. Et si qui fuerint vagantes, de quibus habetur aliqua praesumptio vel
suspitio mali, TUNC DE EORUM RECEPTORIBUS.)
If all those of the HUNDRED, or of the fee, (or fief,) of the age of 12 years
and above, have sworn fealty to the King;m and of the receiversn of others
wittingly or knowingly.

5. 5. D' tout SANKE pecherousement espandue, de HUY et CRY levy a tort; ou a
droit, levee et nient suivit duement, et des nosmes d' ceux que encurruerent d'
touts mortalx pecheors en touts especes; come des principals et des
accessories. This article is differently expressed in Fleta, See No 9. Item de
burgatoribus, robbatoribus, et latronibus, falsariis, HOMICIDIS, combustoribus
domorum, et eorum fautoribus, et RECEPTORIBUS. His 13th article may also be
placed here very properly, -- Item de mahematoribus, et vulneratoribus,
imprisonatoribus, et alia contra pacem terrae facientibus. The enquiries
concerning Hue and Cry are expressed in another distinct article in Fleta. (See
No 16.) Item de hutesiis levatis injuste; vel si just. tunc non presecutis,
qui ea levaverint, (this was to prevent false alarms by wanton people,) et per
quos deficit secta. This is the 17th article of the supposed Statute of 18th
Edward II. Des HUES leves et nient pursues. " Of CRIES levied" (or raised) "and
not pursued." And the articles concerning housebreakers and common thieves are
the 12th and 13th of the said supposed Statute, viz. Of breakers of houses and
of their receivers; of common thieves and of their receivers.
"Of all blood" feloniously "shed," [to which I will add a necessary article of
enquiry from the imaginary statute of 18th Edward II. viz. "Of" (any) "wound
made" -- "et de play fait" -- (Edit. of 1529) -- which in the common version is
falsely rendered -- and of frays made -- however, even frays, though there be
no wounds in consequence of them, may, as breaches of the peace, be punished by
the Common Law, which is competent to find effectual remedies for all
immoralities and nuisances,] of hue and cry wrongfully leavied, or rightfully
leavied, or rightfully leavied and not duly pursued, and of the names of those
who pursued; of all mortal sinners of all kinds; as of the principals also of
the accessories.

6. 6. De tout exuls, utlagies, weives, et bannise retornes, et que (for qui)
out eux puis recettes, et de cenx que (for qui) ont ete condemns a la mort ou
for jures le royalme. Compare this with Fleta, No 10. Item de utlagatis vel
abjuratoribus regni reversis, et de eorum bonis et RECEPTORIBUS. And with No 20
of the articles of 18th Edward II. Of persons outlawed returned, not having the
King's warrant.
Of all exiles, outlaws, waives, and banished persons returned, and WHO HAVE
SINCE RECEIVED THEM, and of those who have been adjudged to death or abjured
the realm.

7. 7. "De Christians usurers, et d' touts leur biens."p The Jews, it seems,
were the only people, at that time, permitted to practice usury; but no
distinction is expressed in Fleta, see No 14, in which some other articles of
enquiry are added. Item de USURARIIS, Sortilegis, Apostatis, Traditoribus, et
eorum catall' et RECEPTORIBUS.
"Of" Christians (that are) usurers and of all their goods.

8. 8. "De tresure trove," (see also 23d article of the supposed Statute of
Edward II.) wrecks, waifs, estrayes, et d' chescun purprise et occupation fait
sur l' Roy ou sur sa dignity.o All encroachments upon public streets, or upon
highways, (by land or by water,) are to be deemed purprise or encroachment upon
the King. In Fleta this article is different in some particulars. See No 11.
Item de THESAURO INVENTO, murdris, et weyvio prosecuto retento. See also No 25.
Item de purpraesturis super Regem vel dominum factis.
"Of treasure trove," (i. e. found,) wrecks, waifes, estreyes, and of every
purpresture and encroachmento upon the King,p or upon his dignity.

9. 9. De chescun TORT fait per les ministres l' Roy, et autres al cominaltie
del people.
Of all wrongs done by the King's officers and others to the common people.

10. 10. Et des pur prestures fait en lieu common, en terre, ou en eawe, ou
aillors.q This article also, as well as No 8, includes the enquiries for
encroachments on streets, roads, rivers, etc. as being places that are common
or public; but in Fleta this enquiry is ordered by a distinct article. See No
20. Item de viis et semitis injuste obstructis vel arctatis. Thus, not only the
obstructing, but also the contracting or narrowing, of roads and paths is to be
guarded against by the Court of Frankpledge. See also what is called the
Statute of Frankpledge. (18th Edward II.) Des voies et Semites amenues
(diminished or contracted) "ou estoppes," (or stopped up.) And also the three
preceding sentences relating to encroachments, viz. Des purprestures faitz en
terres, boys, et en ewes a nuisance. Des mures, measons, fosses, et hayes leves
ou abatus a nusaunce. Des bounds sustreitz et emportes. And then follows the
former quotation. De voies et Semites amenus ou estoppes. Enquiries which
should never be omitted. See the Common Version in the Statute-book, articles
No 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, viz. "Of purprestures" (encroachments) made in lands,
woods, and waters to annoyance. Of walls, houses, dikes, (or rather ditches,)
and hedges, set up or beaten down to annoyance. Of bounds withdrawn and taken
away. Of ways and paths opened or stopped. Of waters turned, or stopped, or
brought from their right course. Most of which articles are expressed in the
before-cited chapter of Fleta, No 18 and 19. Item de aquis trestornatis vel
obstructis. Item de fossatis, muris, calceis, stagnis, vel hujusmodi ad
nocumentum levatis, prostratis, vel exaltatis.
"And all purprestures" (or private encroachments) "in" (any) "place" (that is)
"common," (or belonging to the public,) in the land, or in the water, or
elsewhere.q

11. 11. "Des bounds removes a common nuisance." In Fleta, No 17, may answer to
this, as the divisions there mentioned include bounds of division as well as
common fences. Item de DIVISIS fractis, remotis, vel minoratis.
Of boundaries removed to the common nuisance of the people.

12. 12. De chesc. assise enfreint d' pain, cervoise, vine, draps, poys,
mesures, trones, bousseaux, gallons, ulnes, et tolheps, et d' touts faux
balances, et que les ount usees. The same in substance with Fleta, No 21 and
27. Item de falsis mensuris et ponderibus, et rectas assisas Regis violantibus.
-- De violatoribus assisae panis, cervisiae, vini, et pannorum. And, in the
articles of 18th Edward II. the substance of this is included in three
articles, No 24, 25, 26, viz. No 24. Of the assise of bread and ale broken. No
25. Of false measures, as of bushels, gallons, yards, and else. No 26. Of faise
balances and weights.
Of every breach of the assise of bread, beer, wine, clothes, weights,
measures, beams, bushels, gallons, else, and yards, and of all false seals, and
of those who have used them.

13. 13. Et qui ont achaty per un manier d' pois et de mesures, et vendue per
autre manner en fraud des merchants. This article is No 27 in the supposed
Statute, Of such as have double measure, and buy by the great, and sell by the
less; apparently meaning, measures which are nominally the same, but various in
size to gain undue advantage both in buying and selling.
And of those who have bought by one kind of measure, and sold by another kind
in deceit of merchants, or buyers.

14. 14. Des distourbes des fornissements des loyalx judgments, et d'
fornissors de forceous, et des ossessors, et consentants.
Of the disturbers of framing lawful judgments, and of the framers of
wrongful judgments, and of the abbettors, and consenters thereunto.

15. 15. De chccun torceous detenue d' corpse de home, ou d' autre naam.r Naam
or naeme is Saxon for a taking or seizing any person. Hence the Capias in
Withernam, from naeme, captio, and wither, contra, a writ of reprisal to take
either the body, or the chattels, of any oppressor who should be justly
suspected of having taken and concealed any person in private durance, or to
take the goods of those who had unjustly seized the goods of others, until
restitution and satisfaction should be made.
"Of every wrongful detinue" or detaining of the body of a man, or other
distress, taking,r or arrest, whether of body or goods.

16. 16. De chescun faux judgment done pur l'autre view en le Hundred, ou en
le fief.s In the old version this is rendered "given by the view in the other
Hundred," which does not sufficiently agree with the original French, and there
is no coresponding article in Fleta to enable me to find a more satisfactory
rendering.
"Of every false judgment given," for the other view,^ (meaning, perhaps, a
retrospect to the preceding view,) in the Hundred or Fee.

17. 17. "De chescun forstall faits en le common chemin."
Of every fore-stallment done in the common highway.

18. 18. "D' touts torceous ve^e^s."t This word being abbreviated I can only
guess (like the former translator) at the word intended to be understood.
Ve^e^s may be an abbreviation for the plural of veue, the proper French word
for visus, a view, and may refer to the "wrongful views" mentioned in article
16, i. e. to any false judgments that may have been given in the preceding
views. "Torceous veues" may also signify partial or "favorable inquests taken
by the sheriff;" and, so also, if the word intended should be venues, torceous
venues, meaning PACKED JURIES, or juries not duly chosen out by oath from the
proper vicenage, etc. whereby the sheriffs were enabled to replevie, or bail,
malefactors that otherwise were not bailable; and, in this sense, the word
"veues" also answers to the translation given above. As a remedy to such
"wrongful views" or "favorable inquests," the 11th chapter of Westminster
Primer, or 3 Edward I. A. D. 1275, cap. 11, is expressly ordained. In my old
edition of 1529 (beforementioned) it will be found in the 12 chapter. And in
the 16th chapter of that edition of the Primer (in the common edition, chap.
xv.) particular directions are given to distinguish the several cases wherein
bail or replevin may be lawfully given or lawfully refused; and that chapter is
copied, not only at length, but even with some additions by leta in his useful
chapter, concerning the Shiriff's Turns and Views of Frankpledge, to which I
have such frequent occasion to refer on this subject. He also directs a
distinct article of enquiry, concerning baitable persons detained, and
unbailable persons dismissed. See No 29. Item de replegiabilibus injuste
detentis, et irreplegiabilibus dimissis.
"Of" all "wrongful replevies;" i. e. either for regaining possession of goods
that have been duly distreined, or for the bayling, and setting at liberty, men
that have been duly committed to prison. This seems a very proper article of
enquiry, though it is not obvious at first sight how it can be deemed a
translation of the article as expressed in the French copyt of Horn; but in the
false Statute of Frankpledge there is an express article for it, viz. Des
gentes emprisonnes, et puis lesses sauns garauntie. See No 32 in the English
copy of 18th Edward II. Of persons imprisoned, and after let go without
mainprise, i. e. without finding sureties, either as bail for their appearance,
or as securities for the peace, and their future good behavior.

19. 19. "D' tous torceous rescouses,"u or resistance against a lawful
authority; (says Dr. Cowell,) as for example, if a baylife or other officer
upon a writ do arrest a man, and another, (one or more,) by violence, do take
him away, or procure his escape; this act is called a RESCUS. In the supposed
Statute of 18th Edward II. the 19th article seems to have the same object of
enquiry, viz. Of escapes of thieves or felons.
"Of" all "wrongful recousses," or rescues.u

20. 20. D' chescun outrageous distress ou en autre fee, ou en market pur
foreign contract.
Of every outrageous distress in another fee, (or manor,) or in the market
for a foreign contract.

21. 21. D' touts PONTS rompues et CAUSIES, et chemins, common bridges, et qui
les doit repair. See also No 33, in Fleta. Item de PONTIBUS et CALCETIS
fractis.
Of all bridges broken, and causies, ways, common bridges, and who ought for
to repair them.

22. 22. w Des addoubers de viels draps demorrants horse de grands villes en
lieux defendues.

Des tannors et blancheors d' quirres. Et d' main curriers. I have joined these
three sentences under one article, or head of enquiry, because I find them so
connected in the supposed Statute of 18th Edward II. x Des vendours des draps
et curriours des quirs aillours que en villes marchandes.


Of the makers of clothes dwelling out of great towns in places forbidden, and
of tanners and of curriers of leather. This article is very different from the
French original, as well as from Fleta, and the supposed Statute of Edward II.
and it is not easy to trace from any, or all, of these copies what has been
originally intended. According to the old copy of the Myrrour it should be of
the dressers (or patchers) of old cloths dwelling etc.w as if the object was to
prevent a secret vampingup of old, unsaleable, or damaged, clothes in order to
pass them for new. In the articles of 18th Edward II. (No 30,) it is of
cloth-sellers and curriers of leatherx dwelling out of merchant-towns, which I
should suppose to respect rather the markets, than the dwellings, of the
cloth-sellers and curriers, viz. that all wholesale dealing in cloths and
leather should be at public markets, established in great towns like the famous
cloth-markets at Leeds and Halifax, and like the great leather-market in
Leadenhall, that proper market prices may be regularly ascertained and known
for the common benefit of the manufacturers as well as merchants.

And, if this be really the intention of the article, it will enable us the
better to understand how far a man was formerly prohibited from exercising two
several trades, viz. not any two trades in general, but only such trades as are
so particularly connected together, that the exercise of both by one man might,
in some degree, affect the public markets, and (like forestalling) prevent the
fixing of regular market-prices; and even this limitation must be limited to
such trades only which may affect the necessary articles of life; for so, I
think, we may understand the examples recited by Fleta; "that the shoemaker"
(and, of course, all other consumers of leather, the sadler, the
breeches-maker, the glove-maker) "shall not be a tanner," (for, otherwise, the
proper market-price for leather could not be so easily ascertained,) nor the
tanner a butcher, (which would injure the fell-market for pells and hides, and
would give him an undue advantage over other tanners,) nor the business of a
tailor to be exercised (perhaps) by a clothier, or manufacturer of cloth, which
would injure the cloth-markets; but of this last article I am uncertain; for I
acknowledge that I do not understand what is meant by the abbreviated words in
the original, See Fleta, the same chapter, No 35. Item de abbatoribus coreorum,
praeterquam in civitatibus et burgis, et etiam de hiis qui duobus utuntur
officiis, videlicet sutoriae, et tanneriae, vel tanneriae et carnificis, vel
officio scissoris et dub', et etiam dub', praeterquam in burgis et locis
communibus; et plures sunt articuli.
and no article of enquiry ought to be formed on a doubtful question.

23. 23. Des butchers et queux vendont chair suffenne pur sane, et gastre pur
bien cit. zThose butchers who blow up meat with their breath are presentable,
(according to Mr. Robert Powell's treatise of the antiquity, authority, etc. of
the ancient Courts of Let, etc. p. 114.) and, of course, are finable.
"Of butchers," and those who sell unwholesome flesh for that which is sound.
And tainted or "spoiled" (either through too long keeping or want of
cleanlinessz) "for well-conditioned."

24. 24. "D' ceux qui vendont vine perry pur sanc."
Of all those who sell corrupt wine for sound wine.

25. 25 "Et servoise crew ou rousse ou de feves" (or made of beans) ou
deceraie" (perhaps for de cerelle, a sort of perry) "pur covenable et sane."
"And" (of those who sell) "beer" (or) ale, raw, and not well brewed, for that
which is good and wholesome.

26. 26. "Des men's larcines." In the articles of 18th Edward II. some
particular kinds of petty thefts are specified. (No 14.) Des petitz larons come
des owes, selyns, ou garbez. (No 15.) Des larons queux sakent draps ou garbes.
Which, in the common version, are rendered, No 14. Of pety larons, as of geese,
hens, or sheafs. No 15. Of thieves that steal clothes, or of thieves that do
pilfer clothes (to which the translator has added) "through windows or walls;"
as if he understood "garbes" to bear a different sense from garbez in the
preceding sentence, signifying gerbes, or sheaves of corn, but to mean
literally garbes, garments, clothes, shirts, or any part of our garb or dress,
which thieves might be tempted to pilfer from open windows, walls, etc. Fleta
has this article of petty larciny, but he has prefixed to it the article of
cutters of purses, whose crime, when they do not fail in the attempt, can
seldom be ranked as petty larciny, unless we may use the term of cutpurse to
be applicable to all those petty villains whom we commonly call "pick-pockets."
See Fleta, No 15. Item de scissoribus bursarum, et latronibus de modicis
latrociniis, aucarum, (of geese,) "garbarum," (of sheaves,) "pannorum," (of
clothes,) "et hujusmodi."
"Of small larcines," or thefts, commonly called "petit larceny," when the
goods stolen do not exceed the value of twelve-pence.

27. 27. "Des scissors de burses."
"Of cutters of purses."

28. 28. "D' ceux qui les suffrent user lour mestier pur loier." "Of those who
suffer" (other) persons to exercise their trade for hire. This perhaps may
relate to the several particular branches of trade beforementioned, (in p. 127
and 128.) two of which cannot lawfully be exercised by any one person for the
reasons before assigned. And this article may be intended to deter tradesmen in
any of these branches from permitting tradesmen of different branches from
carrying on the prohibited union of trades, in their name, for hire.
Of those who suffer people to use any mystery for reward or fee.

29. 29. "D' pernors d' thefeboot," probably the same kind of persons may be
intended by the redeemers of robbery mentioned in Fleta. See No 30. Item de
redemptoribus latrocinii.
"Of receivers of thief-boot," i. e. receivers of "stolen goods."

30. 30. "D' sesors et hauntors d' faux dice."
Of makers and haunters of false dice.

31. 31. "D' outrageous tolners."
"Of outrageous tole-takers," i. e. those who take more toll than the law
directs.

32. 32. "D' touts trecheors et deceivers."
"Of all other" cheaters (or trickers) and "deceivers."

33. 33. "D' touts manners conspirators."
"Of all manner of conspirators."

34. 34. Et de touts autres articles qui valor purront a pecher destruer. This
article must, of course, include all the other articles mentioned by Fleta, and
also in the articles of Edward II. though they are not particularly mentioned
in the Myrrour.

Also of the breakers of goals, the ravishers of women, and the seducers of
wives, and of nuns, or single women. (No 12.) Item de fractoribus goalarum,
raptoribus mulierum, et abductoribus uxorum et monalium. In the articles of
18th Edward II. No 21. Of women ravished not presented before the coroners. De
rape de feme qui n'est my present devant le coroner. Which should rather be
rendered. Of the rape of woman which is not presented before the coroner. This
includes not only the detestable acts of violence, which alone is expressed by
the former rendering, but also the seduction or carrying off a minor even with
her own consent, which in law is deemed a rape because of the nonage. The old
Saxon laws punished every lascivious affront, or impudent incivility, to women,
which might be deemed a leading step to greater injuries, by proportionable
amerciaments, which the Court-Leets and Views may surely resume, if they
please, in favor of morality, to vindicate the just rights of modest women,
and to promote honorable marriage, which is notoriously hindered by the
prevalence and facility of whoredoms, and by the general neglect of doing
justice to poor, injured, helpless, girls, It is unreasonable and unnatural
that all the difficulties and ill consequences of temptation between the youth
of both sexes should be cruelly laid upon the weaker vessel, whereby she is too
often irrecoverably loft, and added to the pitiable swarms of wretched female
seducers to revenge her injury on the other sex by the communication of a
loathsome disease, till her wretched career in the service of Satan is closed
by a miserable and hopeless death! The marriage act has greatly added to the
promotion of these evils, by taking away the force of contracts, and other
circumstances of the common law, that was favorable to the cases of injured
young women, and this merely to indulge the unreasonable pride of families*
by punishing their seducers, who, in ancient times, would have been compelled
to marry them.

The coroners were particularly required to vindicate the rights of females by
enquiring after rapes, as appears by the last quotation from the articles of
18th Edward II. This circumstance is not mentioned in Fleta, though we there
find a distinct article respecting coroners, in which, however, this crime, as
being a felony, must necessarily be included. -- Item de feloniis quorum clamor
non pervenit ad coronatores. -- Also concerning FELONIES, the cry of which did
not reach the CORONERS. The rights of the crown ought also to be enquired after
at the torns of the sheriffs, and at Views of Frankpledge, (and undoubtedly
also at other Leets,) not only of alienations of land, etc. but also of
escheats of every kind, and of the fines, amerciaments, and other profits, of
these popular courts, which, howsoever they may have been granted to private
lords of manours, may always be resumed according to the true, legal, doctrine
of "nullum tempus occurrit Regi," as res fiscalis, a branch of the public
revenue, which ought never to be sold or transferred by any King to another
person, being res quasi sacra quae dari non potest, nec vendi, nec ad alium
transferri a principe vel a Rege regnante; whereas it is otherwise in the
alienation of lands, tenements, etc. in which, tempus currit contra Regem sicut
contra quamlibet privatam personam, as I have shown in a distinct tract on that
doctrine. But the more sacred branches of the public revenue, those which are
properly res fiscalis, should be carefully enquired after; for, if they were
duly levied and paid into the exchequer to the public account, they would
considerably augment the national treasure without burthening the people, nay,
they would be really, on the contrary, profitable to the people, not only in a
moral sense, by restraining vice of every kind, but also in pecuniary
advantage, by lowering the poor's rates, and by aiding the national treasury,
in so essential a manner as would render less taxes necessary.

The 22d article in Fleta, charges the Leet-juries with the conservation of the
rights of the crown. Et si in TURNIS VICOMITIS vel VISIBUS HUNDREDARUM tunc
sic, de jure regis relato, vel alienato in terra, vel in mari, per quem fuerit
alienatum, vel celatum, et a quo tempore.

Notice should also be taken of any new customs or usages set up either in land
or water. See Fleta, No 32. Item de NOVIS consuetudinibus in terra vel in aqua
levatis. To which should also be added a strict enquiry after old customs and
usages withdrawn, especially of those which were due to the popular courts. See
the articles of 18th Edward II. No 6. Of customs and services, due to this
court, withdrawn, how, and by whom, and in what bailiff's (or hundreder's)
"times." There are a few other circumstances of enquiry peculiar to the
articles of 18th Edward II. viz. "De ceux queux vount en message dez larons."
See No 16 in the common version. Of such as go in message for thiefs. No 22.
"Of clippers and forgers of money;" (fauseours de la money;) rather falsisiers
of money. No 28. "Of such as continually" (rather "assiduously" --
"assiduelement") haunt taverns, and no man knows whereon they do live, or
"from whence this" (expense) "comes;" "et home ne syet dount ceo vint." No 29.
Of such as sleep by day, and watch by night, and fare well, and have nothing.
No 31. Of such as fly unto church or churchyard, and after depart without
doing that which belongs thereunto. The latter part of this sentence is
differently expressed in the original, viz. "Et puis sen vount sauns fair
l'assesse." Churches and churchyards no longer afford protection to
delinquents, but there are still some privileged places which should be so
regulated as not to afford a temporary shelter to debtors, etc. merely to
enable them to illude "the due process of the law," and then to escape without
making any proper advances toward satisfying the law. " -- sauns fair
l'assesse," which, I suppose, should rather be l'assise, i. e. without
demanding a due enquiry into their case by inquest or assise of a jury. The
privilege should afford them, indeed, a short, temporary, asylum from any
single, merciless, creditor, yet not so as to favor their escape, but merely
to give them time to call their other just creditors together, in order to make
an equal division, as far as their effects will go, after giving up all upon
oath, and then to be absolutely at liberty by the common law without fear of
farther arrest if there is no just suspicion of concealment. The "due process
of the law" is sacred, and ought not to be baffled (nor even delayed in any
other manner than what I have described) by abuses of privileged places; and
therefore all Court-Leets or trithings are competent, as being "Courts of the
King," to vindicate the law, and to limit the asylum of privileged places
within reasonable bounds, so as to relieve oppressed debtors without violently
injuring the just rights of creditors. The old common law custom
beforementioned in behalf of debtors, viz. that they should be absolutely
relieved from the fear of arrest, by giving up all their effects, upon oath,
amongst their creditors, was called, in the North of England, "swearing
themselves bare," and I remember some instances of it several years ago, but
whether it is still in use I do not know: it is, however, a reasonable usage;
which, under the regulation of Court-Leets, (were they universally revived,)
might prevent the imprisonment, and consequent ruin, of many useful and
industrious members of society. The only circumstance remaining to be cited
from the articles of 18th Edward II. is No 33. Of such as take doves in winter
by door-falls or engines. Door-falls are not mentioned in the original, but
"laces," for lacets, nooses or snares. Some other very necessary subjects of
enquiry are mentioned by Fleta though omitted in all the other lists of
articles, viz. concerning all neglects in keeping watch and ward, and
concerning the King's highways not duly widened. (No 28.) Item de vigiliis non
observatis, et viis regalibus non elargatis. And, lastly, (all the other
articles having been already cited.) Item de hiis qui retinuerint probatores.
-- Also of those who had retained provers, or (as they were commonly called)
"approvers." An approver signifies, in our common law, (says Dr. Cowell,) one,
that confessing felony of himself, appealeth or accuses another, one or more,
to be guilty of the same; and he is called so, because he must PROVE that
which he has alleged in his appeal. Staunf. pl. cor. fo. 142. And that
proof is by battle, or by the country, at his election that appealed. etc.
And whilst the barbarous and unreasonable custom of "trials by battle"
continued, a hardened villain that was skilful at cudgeling, could bear a
hearty drubbing, had it in his power (if it be true that the appellor had the
election of the kind of trial and not the appellee) to compel any honest man
that happened to be weaker than himself, either to risque the misfortune of an
unequal combat, or to lose his land and fly the country. An enquiry therefore
after the retainers and encouragers of such dangerous knaves was highly
necessary in ancient times, but the approvers of the present times, i. e. those
culprits, who turn King's evidence to save their own necks, cannot now endanger
the life of an honest man in trials by the country unless the jury be extremly
ignorant or partial; because such men, who have already confessed their own
crimes, cannot justly be deemed credible witnesses; so that their information
is of no other avail or weight than as it may lead to more substantial
evidence. And, besides the crimes already mentioned, every other act of
injustice or vice whatsoever, and even mere immoralities (as I before remarked)
are within the cognizance of the Court-Leets or Trithings, which are competent
in themselves to find a remedy for every inconvenience without fearching for
acts of parliament, because the latter were intended, at least, to aid and
promote justice, and not to take away or lessen the just power of the ancient
courts in suppressing vice and immorality. The pecuniary penalties, however,
ordained by statutes against various crimes and misdemeanors may afford to the
Juries of Leets some information respecting what may be deemed an adequate
amerciament; but it cannot be levied by virtue of the statute unless there is
also an express clause, giving power to Leets for that purpose, (like the
Statute of 4 James I. c. 5. against drunkenness;) but as this, I believe, is
very seldom the case, it is better to proceed entirely by the authority of the
common law in all cases wherein it is not expressly altered or changed by
statute. With respect to drunkenness, (a vice which generally precedes most
other vices, and cannot therefore afford the least color of excuse to any, but
is rather to be deemed an aggravation to the guilt of all vices,) every
circumstance of it ought to be strictly enquired after, and the defaulters
should be regularly amerced without remission that they may want money, at
least, though they do not want inclination, for that damnable Be not deceived:
neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, NOR DRUNKARDS, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. 1 Cor. vi. 9.10.
also Gal. v. 21.
vice. Profane swearing and cursing, and also every idle or heedless mention of
God's holy name should be duly mulcted at the Court Leet without respect of
persons, either of rich or poor, except in a due proportion of the amerciaments
to their respective abilities of paying, that the penalties may be felt and
regarded by offenders of all ranks, so that the justice of the Court may be
equal and effectual.

By a statute of 3: Eliz. c. 7. some other articles of enquiry are submitted to
the cognizance of court leets. viz. If any person has built, or caused to be
built, any manner of cottage for habitation or dwelling, or converted any other
building to be used as a cottage for habitation or dwelling, without assigning,
or laying, to the same cottage or building, four acres of ground at the least,
etc. lying near to the said cottage to be continually occupied and manured
therewith, so long as the same cottage shall be inhabited.

The forfeit or penalty is 10l. to the King, and the upholding, maintaining,
and continuing, any such cottage is 40s. for every month. The act does not
extend to cottages erected in any city, town corporate, or ancient borough or
market town, etc. nor to cottages for the necessary and convenient habitation
or dwelling of workmen or laborers in any mineral works, coal mines, quarries
or delfs of stone or slate, or in or about the making of brick, tile, lime, or
coals, within this realm: so as the same cottages or buildings be not above one
mile distant from the place of the said mineral, etc. nor to any cottage to be
made within a mile of the sea; or upon the side of such part of any navigable
river where the admiral ought to have jurisdiction, so long as no other person
shall therein inhabit, but a sayler or man of manual occupation, to, or for
making, furnishing, or victualling of any ship or vessel used to serve on the
sea, nor to any cottage to be made in any forest, chase, warren, or park, so
long as no other person shall therein inhabit but an underkeeper or warrener,
etc. nor to any cottage heretofore made, so long as no other person shall
therein inhabit, but a common herd man or shepherd, for keeping the cattle or
sheep of the town; or a poor, lame, sick, aged or impotent person; nor to any
cottage to be made, which, for any just respect, upon complaint to the justice
of assize, at the assizes, or to the justices of peace at the quarter sessions,
shall, by their order, entered in open assizes, or quarter sessions, be decreed
to continue for habitation for and during so long time only as by such decree
shall be tolerated and limited.

But cottages "builded upon commons or waste grounds" were allowed only three
acres to be enclosed to and with the same; and if there be above the number of
three acres enclosed therewith, the overplus shall or may be laid open by the
owner or owners of the same wastes, etc. See 3d and 4th Edw. VI. c. 3.

And enclosed gardens, orchards, or ponds, made in any such wastes or grounds
are permitted by the last mentioned act to remain to the owners, if they exceed
not the quantity of two acres (. v. and vi.)

We must necessarily understand that the permission in these two clauses could
not have been intended to extend to parts of commons or wastes that have been
clandestinely joined by enclosures to any neighboring freehold land; for the
latter is notorious incroachment or pu^presture on public rights by land
owners, who, on account of the land they already possess, are the least
entitled to such an indulgence.

The court leet should also enquire, If there be any inmate, or more families
or households than one, dwelling or inhabiting in any one cottage? In which
case the owner or occupier of the cottage forfeits to the lord of the leet 10s.
for every month that any such inmate, or other family than one shall dwell or
inhabit in any cottage as aforesaid, etc. See the before cited act of 31 Eliz.
c. 7. which gives full power to court leets to enquite and to take presentment
by the oath of jurors, of all and every offense in this behalf (i. e.
respecting cottages, etc.) and upon such presentment had or made, to levy by
distressed to the use of the lord of the leet, all such sums of money as so shall
be forfeited, etc.

We are farther informed by Fleta, in the chapter before cited (viz. lib. ii.
c. 52.) that when the CHIEF PLEDGES shall have answered distinctly, says he,
Cum autem Capitales Plegii ad haec capitula distinct responderint, non solum
est eorum veredicto fioes adhibenda, verumetiam sacramento et veredicto
duodecim liberorum hominum, qui super indictamentis praedictis et etiam de
concelamentis praedictis onerentur veritatem declarare; nec poterunt a
sacramento excusari per exceptionem, quod non fine brevi reg', co quod illo die
non habebit exceptio locum, quia concessum est omnibus libertatem visus francii
plegii habentibus, quod sui liberi tenentes, vel alii liberi ad visus suos
sectatores in turnis et visibus jurent, non obstante ullo reglo mandato, vel
graviter pro contemptu amercientur, eo quod DIES REGIS EST, ET IN FAVOREM PACIS
FUIT INVENTUS.
to these various heads (or articles) belief is due not only to their verdict
but also to the oath and verdict of twelve freemen, who, upon the said
indictments and also upon the said concealments are charged to declare the
truth; nor can they be excused from their oath by EXCEPTION, which (is) not
without the kings writ, because that NO EXCEPTION will have place on that day,
for to all that have the liberty of VIEW OF FRANKPLEDGE, it is granted that
their own FREE TENANTS, and OTHER FREEMEN SUITORS TO THEIR VIEWS (or inquest)
shall swear' (act upon oath) in TURNS and VIEWS, notwithstanding any royal
mandate (to the contrary) or they shall be heavily amerced for the contempt,
because that it is THE KING's DAY (i. e. the day on which the great leet after
Michaelmas is held for the view of frankpledge is to be deemed the king's day)
and IT WAS INVENTED IN FAVOR OF (the common) PEACE.


And of all other articles availeable for the destruction of offenders.

"And the presentiments are to be sealed" (continues the author of the Myrrour)
with the seals of the jurours, so that none, by fraud, do increase or
diminish them; and that which cannot be redressed there by these presentiments
is presentable at the shiriffes first turn; and those things which the
sheriffs cannot redress are to be presented by the sheriffs into the
exchequer.

All those who are presented for any offense which is mortal, and banished
persons who are returned, and their receivers, and those who are not in
allegiance under the King, are to be seized upon, and their goods to be seized
into the King's hands.

And although it be so that the bailiffe cannot hear and determine any action
AT THE LEETE, (in the original it is "A LA TORNEE,") nevertheless if any one
present be grieved by any wrong full presentment, and complain thereof; or if
the Bayliffe or Steward have a suspicion that the Jurours be, in some case,
perjured, by concealing of any offense which is presentable, or of any
offender; it is lawful for the Bayliffes, (or Stewards,) by twelve more
discreet men, (in the original -- per xii. plus vaillant, "more courageous" or
"more worthy,") to enquire of the truth thereof without delay; and although
that the last Jurours should say that the first are perjured, nevertheless
because that no DECENERY (in the original, TESTIMONY) " or Jurour IS NOT
ATTESTABLE" (in the original, N'EST ATTEINTABLE, is not attaintable) with less
than TWO JURYES, and because the latter JURIE is not taken, but EX OFFICIO, of
the Bayliffe, and not in the nature of an attaint, the first Jurours are NOT to
be taken ATTAINTED, but are only to be AMERCED.

And if any one profer himself to swear fealty to the King, he is first to be
PLEDGED in some FRANCKPLEDGE, and put into the DECENERY, ( mise en DIZEIN,
placed in a Decenary, the French word DIZEIN, for a Decenary, being manifestly
the root of the word dozen, which now bears a very different sense,) "ana" (be)
afterward sworn to the King; and then he is sobidden to offend and common (i.
e. commune) with offenders, and he is to be enjoined to be obedient to his
CHIEF PLEDGE. CHIEF PLEDGE, i.e. The captain of ten, the elected chief of the
ten deciners by whom the newly-admitted stranger is to be pledged, if he is not
a householder, but only a lodger, a journeyman, or a servant; but with whom he
is to be associated and numbered as a deciner, if he has qualified himself for
it by becoming a householder.


And to take this oath in these VIEWS is none exempted who is past the age of
21 years, (a transposition of these Figures viz. 12, I have already remarked,
that 12 years seems too tender an age for persons to be required to take the
oaths, though it is certainly very proper that all persons of that age should
appear at the view to be publicly admitted as members of the community, and to
be arranged under the protection of some decenary of associated housekeepers,
in order to be duly pledged to the public peace. Bracton, as I have before
remarked, mentions the age of 14 years; perhaps 16 or 18, when youths are more
capable of bearing arms, would be a more reasonable age, or even the transposed
number 21.
is the number expressed in the original,) man or woman, By this it plainly
appears that all young girls, above 12 years of age, as well as youths, are
required to appear at the view of frankpledge, and of course are liable to be
fined for non-attendance. Married women are excused by the law; but have surely
a right to attend with their daughters, if they think it proper to do so.
clerk nor layman, except alliens, strangers, messengers, or merchants, and
those who are in custody.

At these Views of Turns, and Views of Frankpledges, ESSOIGNES HOLD ("TIEN
LIEU ESSOIGNES" essoines take place, or are to be admitted) where the absence
of those who cannot be there is excusable, and such ESSOINES are adjournable to
the next courts following, that the ESSOINERS have ( "eyent" may have) " their
WARRANTS."

Thus it is manifest that the law requires all persons to attend the view of
Frankpledge, and renders them liable not only to the censure of that court, but
also to be amerced if they neglect to attend, and have not a reasonable excuse,
or legal essoin, to justify their absence; so that, if sheriffs and other
persons who have jurisdiction of leets were but convinced of the general
utility of tithing-associations, they have already ample powers to re-establish
them in their respective districts. And if the whole body of the people, both
men and women, were thus regularly and systematically arranged in their proper
divisions, all riots, mobbing, and illegal obstruction, at elections, and on
other occasions of popular concourse, might be I. e. proper Certificates of a
legal excuse, or admissible reason for their absence from the View of
Frankpledge.
easily prevented, and the obscure sons of violence and anarchy might be most
effectually restrained, and, by the facility of discovery, be rendered
"forthcoming," and personally responsible for all misdemeanors, and even for
such impertinencies and immoralities as ought to be curbed: because every
single unit of our national millions of inhabitants, together with his or her
communication and manner of living, might then be easily traced, as to a given
point, throughout all the regular gradations of shires, thousands, hundreds,
fifties, tithings, and families, even to the very chamber of the sculking
delinquent. For, whether a country be more or less populous, it makes no
difference in the efficacy and regularity of this system, because the proposed
numerical divisions would still bear the same proportions exactly, with respect
to each other, in either case, viz. whether the people be few or many. And the
lesser divisions of tithings are so small and manageable, that every
individual, as well as every family therein, may be easily known and controuled
by their elected Chief-Pledges, who, with their whole divisions, are again
included and controuled in still larger divisions, equally well proportioned,
under superior chiefs, or justiciaries. And these justiciaries invested with
ample power of law and right, are so limited, with respect to tort, wrong, or
injury, that they have no authority to act contrary to common consent, nor to
proceed against any man without "due process of the law," though they have
effectual means of information concerning the abode and general circumstances
even of the meanest individual throughout all the tithings by their nearest
neighbors and acquaintance. For, when the tithing are properly regulated with
their superior divisions, each Tithing may truly be said to be as it were a
wheel in the middle of a wheel, (Ezekiel. i. 16.) and more especially so when the
rotation of watch and ward, and of other public service, is duly circulated
throughout all the divisions of a whole nation; for such "wheels" are indeed
full of eyes round about, (Ezekiel. x. 12.) eyes to convey information and
complete knowledge in all popular concerns whatsoever, as I have elsewhere
observed on the word cherubim See Tracts on "National Defense by a Free
Militia," p. 40 and 41.
, so that the most obscure offender cannot escape the justice of the community,
whenever he is duly indicted and sought.

If this ancient form of popular government was duly established, it would also
regulate, with the utmost precision, the rights of all electors, and would
completely obviate the specious objections against Parliamentary Reformation
that have lately been published, in a little tract, entitled " Thoughts on a
Parliamentary Reform This celebrated Tract, little as it is in bulk, has still
less of truth and justice in its positions and conclusions; so that, after
paying all due respect to the singular wit and humor of the writer, we must
necessarily deem it as superficial and groundless as it is short! but it is
nevertheless rendered important and considerable, by the great circulation and
public notice with which it has been honored: for, though the author did not
think proper to prefix his name, the booksellers, it seems, have made no secret
of it, and the work has been industriously retailed by piecemeal in the news
papers, and has, therein, been publicly attributed to a certain facetious old
gentleman of rank and consequence in the polite world, and also of considerable
celebrity as a writer; by which circumstances we may easily account for the
extraordinary ready sale and circulation of such a work.
;" for it would most certainly afford the effectual means of maintaining
perfect peace during the time of elections, and would render the polling of the
electors, (be they ever so numerous,) not only practicable, but perfectly easy
and free from confusion, even if the limitations of the right of voting were
drawn out to the most liberal extent that has yet been proposed; even according
to the plan, which this author ironically declares, he "prefers to all the
rest," viz. that of giving a right of voting universally together with annual
elections. This is the plan, which, he says, appears to be the most uniform,
consistent, and effectual: but then he quaintly adds, it has, indeed, one
capital defect, which is, that it is absolutely and utterly impracticable, etc.

Now, if this was as true as it is witty, the state of the nation would indeed
be desperate! for, if the "most effectual" plan of reformation was really
impracticable, any attempt whatever to correct the enormous inequality, or
in-equity, of the national representation, and its consequent ruinous venality
and manifold destructive corruptions, would indeed be hopeless! and we should,
of course, be obliged to embrace this author's forlorn and disloyal doctrine,
(in p. 17.) which may truly be said to express the scope and drift of all his
arguments; because they are, for the most part, deistically In a well-intended
work of the same celebrated author, wherein Deistical notions ought not to have
appeared without their antidote, we may find several very heterodox and
dangerous positions, stated as the remarks of "some speculative and refined
observers," viz. that to such persons "it has appeared incredible," (say he,)
that a wise and benevolent Creator should have constituted a world upon one
plan, and a religion for it on another; etc. etc. (p. 133.) 2dly, That the love
of power, riches, honor, and fame, are the great incitements to generous and
magnanimous actions; yet by this institution (meaning the christian religion)
"are all these depreciated and discouraged." (p. 134.) 3dly, That government is
essential to the nature of man, and CANNOT be managed without certain degrees
of VIOLENCE, CORRUPTION and IMPOSITION, yet are all these strictly forbid.
(ibid.) 4thly, That nations CANNOT subsist without wars, nor wars be carried on
without rapine, desolation, and murder; yet are these prohibited under the
severest threats, (p. 134 and 135.) 5thly, That the non-resistance of evil must
subject individuals to continual oppressions, leave nations a defenseless prey
to their enemies; yet is this recommended. etc. etc. etc. And at last, he
renders himself answerable for these pernicious and contradictory positions, by
indiscriminately adopting them all, and making them his own, saying, To all
this I answer, that such indeed is the Christian Revelation, though some of its
advocates may, perhaps, be unwilling to own it, and such (says he) it is
constantly declared to be by him who gave it, as well as by those who published
it under his immediate direction: But, happily for mankind and the honor of
our holy religion, the texts, which he has cited to justify his assertion,
contain nothing that can possibly afford the least sanction to any such
doctrines and contradictions. That world, which our Savior spoke of as being
in opposition to him and his, could not mean the world constituted upon the
plan of the Creator, but only the wickedness of worldly men, such as the
apostle Paul has particularly described in his second epistle to Timothy, (chapter
iii. v. 2-9.) Lovers of their own-selves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. etc.
etc. Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having A FORM OF GODLINESS,
BUT DENYING THE POWER THEREOF; from such (said the apostle) "turn away;"
manifestly giving the very same advice, which appears in one of the texts cited
by this writer, " Be not conformed to this world, Romans xii. 2.
" i. e. to the manners and unprofitable pursuits of such worldly men as I have
described in the words of the apostle; for of such is surely formed that world
which is at enmity with God, mentioned in another of the texts cited, by him,
from the apostle James. Nay, that 1 Cor. ii. 6. Jom. iv. 4.
wisdom of the world which is at enmity with God cannot be illustrated by more
flagrant examples than these very positions, which our author has unguardedly
adopted from "some speculative and refined observers," and more especially the
third, that government cannot be managed without violence, corruption, and
imposition, which I propose more particularly to examine, because it is a
political doctrine too generally adopted by placemen and pensioners, and which
is manifestly the very principle or essential spirit which pervaded, and has
notoriously influenced, every page of our author's Thoughts on a Parliamentary
Reform! His first position is materially connected with the third, and will, of
course, fall under the same examination. With respect to his second position, I
shall briefly remark, that, though the love of power, riches, honor, and fame,
are, indeed most commonly the great inoitements to generous and magnanimous
actions, yet, for the honor of human nature, these are not to be deemed the
only incitements, because the MOST "generous" and the MOST magnanimous actions
have much more noble incitements than he has conceived, viz. the love of God,
and the natural love of justice and right; so that his position proves nothing
against the merit of actions that are truly and perfectly generous. And,
besides these worthy incitements, the agency, or influence, of GOD's HOLY
SPIRIT is also to be deemed an incitement to generous and magnanimous actions;
nay, it is certainly the highest incitement, or the supreme principle of action
in man, by which all christians ought to be influenced, and most certainly may
be so, if they do not neglect the promised means! This, I trust, is amply
proved in my tract on the Law of Nature, etc.

The fourth and fifth positions are grounded on a strange misunderstanding of
the true doctrine concerning non-resistance; for though, we are, indeed,
required to forgive personal injuries, and to submit to them with christian
meekness, when any one of ourselves is individually the sufferer, nevertheless
we are, most certainly, bound in christian duty to resist evil and injury
whenever the persons, or property, of other men are in danger; and to defend
each other from all unjust violence and rapine, whenever it is in our power to
do so; and that even at the risk of our lives, which I have fully stated in my
tracts on Crown Law and Passive Obedience. And, if individuals may, legally,
and consistently with their duty as christians, resist evil in defense of each
other, surely a whole christian community, or nation, may, most
conscientiously, be allowed, in their united legislative or executive capacity,
a power of defending the innecent, and of resisting evil and oppression: for
this is the true foundation of all just wars, which, certainly, in the
necessary defense of a nation, may be carried on without the guilt of rapine
and murder; since, even between individuals, the inevitable killing of an
adversary, in the necessary defense of a man's own person, is clearly
justifiable in law, as well as in reason, which is the eternal law of God. And
national justice in many cases, is unquestionably required to resist evil, even
unto blood! The blood of the murderer (i. e. of the voluntary killer of a MAN)
is absolutely required to be shed by MAN, ( "by man shall his blood be shed,"
Genesis ix. 6.) and a moral reason is elsewhere assigned for this retaliation by
man, viz. for blood it desileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of
the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. (Number.
xxxv. 33.) And this, surely, is a resistance to evil, a retaliation of violence
in kind even to the utmost extremity of violence, -- to death! This, however,
must be understood only of judicial acts of retaliation, duly limited in all
their circumstances by the established laws of the community, or nation, which
inhabits the land where the blood is shed; but, under such due restriction, the
retaliation of blood for blood is so far from being forbid, that the land, it
is manifest, cannot be cleansed without it. The indiscriminate doctrine,
therefore, of non resistance, as stated in these two positions, has no
foundation in scripture, nor indeed any where else, except in the
misunderstanding and inaccuracy of these speculative and refined observers!

I may now return to the consideration of his third position, that government
is essential to the nature of man, and CANNOT be managed without certain
degrees of VIOLENCE, CORRUPTION, and IMPOSITION, yet all these are strictly
forbid. The first part of this sentence, as well as the last, must certainly be
admitted as unquestionable truths; but if the middle part of the proposition
were equally true; viz. that government "CANNOT be managed without violence,
imposition," etc. it would follow, of course, that the necessity of the case
must regularly supersede all that is so strictly forbid concerning it! and
then, indeed, these speculative and refined observers would have a better
foundation for their impious insinuation, that the Creator has constituted a
world upon one plan, and a religion for it on another! Nay, I have frequently
heard these very principles avowed in conversation, by some other such "friends
to good government" as our author, in terms to the following effect. That
public business cannot be carried on without BRIBERY and CORRUPTION: that the
measures of administration are indispensably NECESSARY to maintain due
subordination and GOOD GOVERNMENT, and must not, therefore, be impeded by
unseasonable negatives of parliament; so that POLITICAL NECESSITY will
sufficiently justify the statesman in exerting all possible influence to obtain
a majority at any rate. Thus the plea of NECESSITY is introduced to palliate
and excuse, nay, even to justify and establish, the most flagrant enormities!
as if inequity was become an essential principle of government, so authorized
and established by the sanction of general usage, that every attempt to correct
it must be deemed an innovation to the constitution!

In no other point of view can be understood the fallacious and groundless
charge of INNOVATION which has regularly been opposed to parliamentary reform,
by men of a certain description, whenever it has been proposed. With these
latitudinarians in principle, all distinctions between right and wrong must be
measured by political expediency, because government, according to them, cannot
be managed without certain degrees of violence, corruption, and imposition!
Thus the celebrated writer has very honestly stated the ruling maxim of that
venal majority with whom he always voted and associated. And, as these
"speculative and refined observers" have carried this wretched system of
political necessity and expediency to the utmost extent that it was capable of,
I have need only to cite their own woeful experience, as a most striking and
undeniable example of its absurdity!

The INIQUITY of these acknowledged means of "managing government," viz.
violence, corruption, and imposition, added to the MISCARRIAGES which such
worthy ministerial accomplishments have of late years notoriously occasioned,
would form too heavy a burden for one broad back! I speak, therefore, of the
late governing majority, in the aggregate, and shall not be tempted to
particularize, unless any of them should still persist in soliciting and
inviting, as it were, the national justice against themselves, for their former
misconduct when in power, by any farther unreasonable and provoking opposition
to the necessary reformation.

Under the baneful auspices of these justifying Majorities and their Managers,
the Patrons and Friends of this writer, (with the sanction also of his own
steady vote, in all their measures;) the most disgraceful and pernicious
excess, of " violence, corruption, and imposition," has been tried and pushed
to the utmost exertions of the national strength and resources; and at an
expense of blood and treasure, far beyond all example of former times!

And yet the detestable experiment has notoriously failed in almost every
circumstance proposed to be effected by it, and, instead of raising a revenue,
to gratify and ease "the country gentlemen," has sunk the national resources in
a hopeless gulf of debt, the very interest of which is an annual expense of
more than the value of an empire! i. e. a revenue, by the rule of inverse,
against the state, like the "negative quantity" of the algebraists, "less than
nothing," a "minus" of eight millions per annum, at least, besides a most
disgraceful dismemberment of the British empire! So much for the EXPERIENCE of
the "speculative and refined observers."

There are many maxims, indeed, which seem to favor the plea of necessity, as
(1.) "Necessitas non habet legem."
"NECESSITY has no law." (2.) Necessitas facit licitum quod alias non est
licitum.
Necessity makes lawful what, otherwise, is not lawful. (3.) "Salus populi
suprema est lex."
"The safety of the people" (which even bad ministers will pretend to regard)
"is the supreme law." (4.) "Necessitas vincit legem."
"Necessity binds the law." (5.) Necessitas legum vincula irridet.
Necessity scorns the bands of law. (6.) "Nihil magis justum est, quam quod
necessarium est," etc. etc.
Nothing is more JUST than that which is NECESSARY, etc. etc.

But the man, who has not sufficient discrimination to assign the due legal
limits to these doctrines of necessity, is certainly unworthy to be trusted
either in law or politics. For the common law of England requires the
accomaccomplished lawyer, or politician, to be also a christian, and cannot,
therefore, excuse the too fashionable doctrine of the vulgar great, that a
state necessity is not limited by the common rules of honesty and morality.

The maxims in question, therefore, manifestly relate only to such laws as are
made to remedy inconveniences not in themselves evil, mere mala prohibita; but
cannot authorize any thing that is malum in se; for that would be REBELLION
AGAINST GOD, which no case can justify See the protest of a private person
against every suspension of law, etc. p. 25 to 44.
For, of those, who say Let us do evil, that good may come, the scripture has
added, "whose damnation is just," (Romans iii. 8.) and therefore, "melius est
omnia mala pati quam malo consentire," It is better to endure ALL adversities,
than to assent to ONE evil measure.
is an established maxim of right, (3 Inst. 23.) insomuch that a king cannot
legally dispense with "malum in se," nor can all the omnipotence of parliament
establish it by statute; because, by the renovating principles of the common
law, any such statute must be deemed null and void in itself, a mere
corruptela, and no statute, as I have elsewhere amply proved. And, as iniquity,
or malnm in se, is never lawful, neither is it ever NECESSARY; but, on the
contrary, impolitic, and hurtful, even to a proverb "He that sows iniquity
shall reap vanity: and the rod of his anger shall fall." Prove. xxii. 8.
, as it commonly "renders bad worse!" this is the ordinary effect of wicked
policy, (so amply demonstrated in the experience of the celebrated author's
political friends,) so that even the powerful plea of necessity cannot justify
such expedients, nor excuse the dishonesty and treacherous conspiracy of those
who practice them! because the immorality of such evil policy, whether attended
with success or not, is always certain and humiliating; for the worldly
politician, (who strives to parry off evil by evil,) from being, perhaps,
simply unfortunate, renders himself base, miscreant, and dishonorable In a
prophetical description of an abandoned man, (see Psalm xxxvi.) it is declared,
as a part of such a character, that he has not abominated EVII, (...). What
then shall we say of those wretched time-servers, who not only vote for every
evil measure, and oppose every good one, (see Thoughts on a Parliamentary
Reform,) but even promote and inculcate evil by precept and regular principles,
(see the detestable false doctrines of Political Necessity already cited.) The
not hating evil soon draws after it the whole character of reprobacy!
. These (with due deference to "the speculative and refined observers") are the
additions or epithets due to immorality whenever it is active; but this is not
all: even if the wicked policy seems at any time to be successful, if it ever
assists in warding off a temporary misfortune, yet it only transfers the
merited suffering from this world to the next, by rendering the mere worldly.
politician obnoxious to eternal judgment! which is certainly due to every one
that shows himself more afraid of man than of his Creator! -- more a passive
subject under "the prince of this world," (which is the devil himself, the
"mammon of unrighteousness,") than a free citizen of the kingdom of God! For
the indispensable duty of the latter is " righteousness on all occasions (...),
literally, "in everytime," or "at all times," for there can be no time, when
righteousness and true judgment are not to be maintained, so that there never
can be a necessity to dispense with them, or suspend them: " Blessed are the
keepers (or maintainers) of judgment," ((...), i. e. true legal judgment,
without respect of persons, of which the constitutional term in England is "the
due process of the law," and " blessed also is he that does RIGHTEOUSNESS AT
ALL TIMES," (Psalm cvi. 3.) This is an unquestionable AXIOM of the eternal law
of God, and consequently must be received as one of the infallible maxims, or
foundations, of the common law of England.
;" this only is honorable, this only is politic: because " whosoever does not
RIGHTEOUSNESS is not of God." (1 John. 3.10) And the same just principle is
equally indispensable in the duty of every free citizen of the kingdom of
England, by all the infallible foundations of our common law; to which the
propositions of "the speculative and refined observers" are utterly repugnant!
How then shall we reconcile them? Must the very foundations of our law and
national policy be torn up, to make room for a tottering fabric of INIQUITY,
frightfully reared and suspended upon the rotten prop of an imaginary
NECESSITY! No, let us rather examine whether the proposition be true on which
this supposed necessity is built? viz. that government cannot be managed
without certain degrees "of violence, corruption, and imposition! or whether,
on the contrary, this detestable union of three diabolical principles; "
violence, corruption, and imposition," is not itself the most obvious efficient
cause of all the necessities and misfortunes of every government? and which, if
not speedily reformed in our own, must inevitably produce a total subversion of
the state and kingdom?

Search the histories of all preceding nations that are either entirely lost
and overwhelmed with calamity and misery, or else still unhappily continue upon
earth, a contrasted memorial of their once flourishing ancestry, in a wretched
existence of political slavery, subjected to the despotic will, caprice, and
misgovernment, of arbitrary tyrants, and see if a single instance can be found
among them of any nation being thus deplorably reduced, till these baneful
seeds of destruction, violence, corruption, and imposition, (planted and
watered by the refined observations of such "speculative" writers, as the
author of "Thoughts on a Parliamentary Reform!" etc.) had taken deep root, had
sprouted, grown up, and flourished, (under their fostering hands,) till they
were ripe for such a harvest! and yet these refined observers would have us
believe, that the Creator has constituted a world upon one plan, and a
religion for it on another, (p. 133.) as if there was no DIVINE PROVIDENCE in
this world to favor and encourage just men and just measures! or as if "God's
ways were not equal," which, it seems, was an erroneous conception also of the
backsliding people of Israel. Yet, says the house of Israel, The way of the
Lord is not equal. O HOUSE OF ISRAEL, ARE NOT MY WAYS EQUAL? are not your ways
unequal? Therefore will I judge you, O house of Israel, every one ACCORDING TO
HIS WAYS, says the Lord God. Repent, and turn yourselves from all your
transgressions; SO INIQUITY SHALL NOT BE YOUR RUIN, etc. (Ezekiel. xviii. 29, 30.)
By the ruin here spoken of, as occasioned by iniquity, is to be understood a
temporal ruin, to be brought upon their nation, on account of the violence,
corruption, and imposition, and other iniquities, with which their political
"government" was unhappily "managed." This sense is rendered obvious by the
preceding chapter, as well as by several which follow it; and particularly, in
the 22d chapter, these three baneful iniquities are plainly pointed out, as
principally concurring to effect the then approaching destruction of Jerusalem!
And first, with respect to "VIOLENCE." Behold, (said the prophet,) the princes
of Israel, every one were in thee to their power to shed blood. And again, --
in the midst of thee have they DEALT BY OPPRESSION with the stranger: in thee
have they vexed the fatherless and widow. And, with respect to their IMPOSITION
and DECEIT, In thee (said the prophet) are men which CARRY TALES to shed blood;
and, with respect to their CORRUPTION and BRIBERY, In thee (said the prophet)
have they TAKEN GIFTS to shed blood! And these, with other crimes, are
expressly declared to be the true causes of their political failure, and
national disgrace; "behold, therefore," (said the prophet, in the name and
power of him who sent him,) I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain
which thou have made, and at thy blood which has been in the midst of thee.
Can thine heart endure, (or be firm,) or can thy hands be strong, in the days
that I shall deal with thee? I, THE LORD (JEHOVAH,) have spoken (it) and will
do (it.) And then follows the denunciation of vengeance, the usual effect of
such "management" in politics! And I will scatter thee among the heathen, (or
nations,) and disperse thee in the countries, and will consume thy filthiness
out of thee. (Ezekiel. xxii. 6-15.) These are clearly temporal judgments; -- the
expulsion of a whole nation from their native country, and their dispersion as
vagabonds amongst their enemies, for their wicked policy in having "managed"
their government with " violence, imposition, and corruption!"

In the 33d chapter, also, the prophet again repeatedly reproves their impious
supposition of an inequality in the ways of the Creator, which appears to have
been essentially the same with the Deistical proposition of our "refined
observers," about a world upon one plan, and a religion for it on another. See
verses 17 to 29. Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not
equal: but as for them, (said the prophet speaking of the "speculative refined
observers" of that day,) their way is not equal. When the RIGHTEOUS turns
from his RIGHTEOUSNESS, and commits INIQUITY, (whether in " violence,
imposition, or corruption," or as a literary advocate for all three!) he shall
even die thereby. But, if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that
which is LAWFUL and RIGHT, he shall LIVE THEREBY. Yet, ye say, the way of the
Lord is not equal. O ye house of Israel, I will judge you every one after his
ways. And a little farther, in the same chapter, the prophet is charged with a
solemn appeal to them, concerning the improbability of their being permitted to
continue in possession of their country, if they continued their detestable
practices of violence, etc. in direct opposition to the plan; religion, and
laws, of the Creator! Wherefore say ye unto them, thus says the LORD GOD; Ye
eat with the blood, (a practice expressly forbid under the patriarchal and
Christian, as well as the Mosaic, dispensations,) and lift up your eyes toward
your idols This is a charge of criminality which cannot be evaded by those who
pray before images, on the delusive pretense of assisting their devotion: for,
though their prayers may be addressed to the prototype, yet they are certainly
guilty of lifting up their eyes toward their idols!
and shed blood: and SHALL YE POSSESS THE LAND? Ye stand upon your sword, (i.
e. they trusted in their standing armies, the power of the beast, and the
source of all their criminal VIOLENCE,) "ye work abomination," (which includes
every species of CORRUPTION and immorality,) and ye defile every one his
neighbor's wife Thus private vices also hasten public calamities, and national
disinheritance, and should, therefore, be strictly presented and suppressed, by
censures and amerciaments, in the courts of the congregation, the only
effectual means of restraining immorality!
; and "SHALL YE POSSESS THE LAND?" and then follows God's vindication of his
PROVIDENCE, in an awful denunciation of a sure temporal vengeance for such
enormities! Say thou thus unto them, Thus says the LORD GOD, (as) I live,
surely they that are in the wastes shall fall by the sword, and him that is in
the open field will I give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that be in
the forts and in the caves shall die of the postilence. For I WILL LAY THE LAND
MOST DESOLATE, and the pomp of her strength shall cease; and the mountains of
Israel shall be desolate, that none shall pass through. Then shall they know
that I am the Lord, when I have laid the LAND most desolate BECAUSE of all
their abominations which they have committed. It is manifest, therefore, that
the Creator has NOT constituted a world upon one plan, and a religion for it
on another, but, as "his ways are equal," does indispensably require all men
who profess his religion, as well rulers as subjects, to conduct themselves in
all things according to the plan of that religion, which is righteousness. For
the Prince of peace, our leader and instructor, is also the King of
righteousness; and, accordingly, the only plan of government, which christians
can hope to maintain in this world with prosperity and success, must be that of
" righteousness; for "RIGHTEOUSNESS exalts a nation," " but SIN is a reproach
to any people." (Prove. xiv. 34.) The throne is established by righteousness,
(Prove. xvi. 12.) See also the noble maxim of eternal law, in Psalm xxxvii. 37.
(...) which may thus be rendered, preserve INTEGRITY, and regard RIGHT, for the
after-effect to a man is peace. This is the uniform doctrine of many other
texts, which manifestly relate to the management of temporal governments in
this world The advice of the apostle Paul to the Philippians, (chapter i. v. 27.)
was manifestly intended to regulate their whole behavior as a christian
community, and not merely their duty as individuals. Only let your CONVERSATION
be as it becomes the gospel of Christ. The imperative verb, (...), in our
letters, politeuesthe, rendered, let your conversation be,) included the
political duty of the Philippians, in all their public transactions and
arrangements for the government of their community, as well as the duty of
individuals: and the maintaining such becoming conversation, in all our
dealings, public or private, as may be suitable to our religious profession, is
not only a rule of christianity but also of the old law. Right, either in the
practice of the courts of judgment, or in politics, was never to be set aside.
Nay, not only right, but right right, i. e. perfect right, or, as it is
rendered in our common version, " that which is altogether JUST shall thou
follow." And the reason for that excellent rule is not less binding upon
Englishmen at this day than it ought to have been upon the Israelites, to whom
it was originally declared, viz. that thou may live and inherit the land. A
reason, surely, which ought to awe all temporal governments into a strict
observance of "right right," of invariable righteousness and honesty in all
their measures. See Deuteronomy. xvi. 20. That which is altogether just ((...), or
RIGHT RIGHT) shall thou follow, that thou may live and INHERIT THE LAND
which the Lord thy God gives thee. Therefore, even in worldly policy as well
as in future judgment, the old English proverb is irrefragable, "Honesty is
always the best policy."
, and therefore "the world," or that part of it, which is constituted upon a
different plan, is NOT constituted by the Creator, neither can it have any part
in him For, what fellowship is there between RIGHTEOUSNESS and ILLEGALITY?
((...);) and what communion to LIGHT with DARKNESS? and what concord to Christ
with Belial? 2 Cor. vi. 14.
; but belongs to that being alone, which deceives the nations, to their
temporal as well as their eternal destruction. That old serpent, called the
devil and satan, which DECEIVES THE WHOLE WORLD! (Rev. xii. 9.) i. e.
deceives all that numerous and unhappy part of mankind that do not resist him
according to the Creator's plan of religion, but blindly adopt the contrary
plan of " violence, corruption, and imposition." These are the servants and
ministers of Satan! and not of God! and every "government," managed on such
principles, is manifestly a branch of Satan's temporal dominion, fitted for
destruction; a hateful part of that world, which is opposed to the kingdom of
Christ, in the several texts that have been so grossly misunderstood by the
celebrated writer abovementioned!

"Let no man deceive you," (said the beloved apostle of Christ,) he that does
RIGHTEOUSNESS is RIGHTEOUS even as he is RIGHTEOUS. He that commits sin is
of the devil; for the devil sins from the beginning. And again, in this THE
CHILDREN OF GOD are manifest, and THE CHILDREN OF THE DEVIL: whosoever DOES
NOT RIGHTEOUSNESS is not of GOD, neither he that loves not his brother. (1
John iii. 7, and 10.) So that even the omission of righteousness is also fatal
and impolitic, though not, perhaps, in so great a degree as the actual exercise
of our celebrated author's three practical principles of iniquity.

In the history of David, we find that his omissions to execute justice and
right, on some occasions, were attended by punishments almost as exemplary as
those which marked his actual crimes. His neglect to punish his son Amnon's
detestable violence and persidy, toward his sister Tamer, produced the
treacherous murder of Amnon by his brother Absalom; and again, his farther
neglect to punish Absalom for that notorious murder (for no human authority can
pardon murder) left him a bloody enemy to seek his own life, and actually to
dethrone him for a time!

The holy scriptures abound with such striking instances of bad, as well as of
good, actions; but all of them are to be deemed as ensamples, written for our
admonition, (1 Cor. x. 11.) and therefore, we must not presume to say, with the
celebrated author, that some of the occurrences, related in scripture, are of
no importance at all, (p. 128.) and, the more especially, because even the
occurrences which he himself has picked out "I have no doubt," (says our
celebrated author,) but that St. Paul was shipwrecked, and that he left his
cloak and his parchments at Troas; but the belief of these facts makes no part
of christianity, nor is the truth of them any proof of its authority. It
proves, only, that this apostle could not, in common life, be under the
perpetual influence of infallible inspiration; for, had he been so, he would
not have put to sea before a storm, nor have forgot his cloak.
and cited, as samples of this unwarrantable doctrine, (and, doubtless, a
gentleman, so celebrated in the polite world for wit and genius, must be
supposed to have chosen the most obvious samples that could be found, if there
were any,) are so far from being of no importance at all, that they are, on the
contrary, highly important, and truly profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, etc. as, indeed, every other occurrence related in scripture most
certainly is both important and necessary, in some respect or other, whether we
have sagacity to discover it or not; because the same authority assures us,
that ALL SCRIPTURE (is) given by inspiration of God, and IS PROFITABLE for
DOCTRINE, for REPROOF, for CORRECTION, for INSTRUCTION in righteousness, etc. 2 Timothy iii. 16.

Happily the celebrated writer, it seems, has "no doubt," of "these facts," for
otherwise "the belief" of them, he must allow, "is necessary," if it is but for
one plain reason, viz. that they are related in the holy scriptures: but
whenever the occurrences, mentioned in scripture are related in any other way,
in any way, I mean, that is contrary to, or unsupported by, the
scripture-account of them, (like the celebrated author's own way of relating
the occurrences in question) then, indeed, as he says, "the belief of these
facts," when SO RELATED, "makes no part of christianity!" When this gentleman,
for instance, remarks concerning "the truth of them," that it proves, only,
that this apostle could not, in common life, be under the perpetual influence
of infallible inspiration, (a point which requires no proof or dispute at all,)
he immediately subjoins, by way of illustration, a state of circumstances which
is utterly discordant with the scripture-account of "these facts," saying,
"for, had he been so," (i. e. under the influence of inspiration,) he would not
have put to sea before a storm, nor forgot his cloak. But the celebrated author
himself had "forgot," (it seems,) that the apostle was a prisoner at that time,
and could not avoid being "put to sea," so that this circumstance proves
nothing at all to the purpose of his argument; and he has forgot, likewise,
another circumstance which is still more unlucky for his assertion, viz. that
the holy scripture has expressly informed us, that the apostle actually
foretold the danger of the voyage, and has thereby given us ample proof of his
being under the influence of infallible inspiration, at the very time, and in
the very fact, which the celebrated writer has ingeniously cited as a proof to
the contrary! (See Acts. xxvii. 10.) The occurrence is, therefore, so far from
being of "no importance at all," that it is, perhaps, the most important of any
in the whole history of that apostle! if we except his conversion; because the
actual attention of divine providence toward just and righteous men is
exemplified (for the comfort of all persons that are truly religious) in this
eminent instance of God's regard to the person of Paul, in giving him such
foreknowledge for his preservation. And the other circumstances of the
shipwreck are also highly important in many other respects; for, though the
ship was really lost, agreeable to the apostle's prediction, yet God afterward
gave to Paul the lives of all that failed with him, whereby he was authorized
to assure them of safety, even when they were at the utmost extremity of
danger, saying, there shall not a hair fall from the head of any of you, though
there were 276 souls on-board! so that the celebrated writer has, indeed,
picked out a most important occurrence to serve him as a sample of those which
he supposes "of no importance at all!" and, as to the other supposed
occurrence, (viz. that the apostle had "forgot his cloak,") it has not the
least foundation in holy scripture, or elsewhere, that I know of, except in the
lively imagination of this agreeable writer, in order to give a quaint and
facetious turn to the end of one of his sentences, which is an object of more
importance, it seems, with some fashionable authors, than truth itself! That
the apostle LEFT his cloak in Troas, ((...), which, "I LEFT," says he, "in
Troas with Karpus," 2 Timothy iv. 13.) and, probably, his books also, is not to be
disputed; but we have no warrant to suppose that he FORGOT either cloak or
books, unless we may be allowed to confound all due discrimination of words and
their separate senses for the sake of a bon-mot. And even this circumstance of
the apostle's having "left his cloak and his parchments at Troas" (immaterial
as it may seem at first sight) is not to be esteemed "of no importance at all;"
for this teaches us that the apostle though under a WATCHFUL PROVIDENCE) found
it necessary to provide against such natural insirmities as it is committed to
the guardianship of human care to fence against; and, though he was instructed
with an abundance of revelations, (yet) that did not supersede the necessity
and use of books, for such improvement in knowledge as was within the power of
human industry. (See Mr. Ridley's Sermon preached before the hon. Trustees for
establishing the Colony of Georgia, and the Associates of Dr. Bray, in 1746, p.
15.) These occurrences, therefore, I hope, will at length prove both
"important" and "profitable" even to the celebrated writer himself; because a
careful review of them, as related in scripture, must convince him that he has
been too hasty and superficial in his citations; whereby he himself stands as
much in need of "reproof" as his celebrated writings do of "correction;" so
that his good sense, I hope, will incline him to profit by the "instruction"
which necessarily arises from these two humiliating circumstances: and, if ever
he should conceive that I may be able to assist his farther improvement by the
removal of any apprehended disticulties, he may assuredly command my best
endeavors.


founded, not only on the like false idea of the universal and irremediable
existence and prevalence of wrong in this world, but also (which is still
worse) on the same imaginary NECESSITY of yielding to that wrong, for the
maintenance of government; i. e. the delusive and baneful doctrine of a
NECESSITY to do evil, that good may come, the common received notion of
Deistical time-servers, who will not admit the true comfortable doctrine of
God's immediate direction and providence over all his works, and consequently
cannot form any idea of the NECESSITY of doing right, and of being strictly
just on all occasions, exceeds every other necessity, and removes all
difficulty from the soundest and best policy in the government of states and
kingdoms; -- "fiat justitia, ruat coelum." This gentleman's abilities as a
writer, his ready wit, and smooth agreeable style, insure a ready reception of
his sarcasms even against the most interesting and serious truths, I mean, with
careless, superficial readers, who delight more in wit, or in elegant
expression, than in real information. But, with men of common sense, and common
honesty, it may be deemed a sufficient answer to this gentleman's sophistry, to
remark, that, in proving too much, he has far overshot his mark, and
consequently proves nothing that he has aimed at! because his ingenious
arguments, against all honest endeavors to reform national abuses, and against
every plan that has yet been proposed for lessening the corruptions of
parliament, hold equally good against having any parliament at all! and, when
we find that this apparent tendency of his arguments is not only a necessary
conclusion to be drawn from thence, (exactly what an opponent would wish to fix
upon him,) but, also, that it is a conclusion expressly acknowledged, even in
his own words, (see p. 17. that those, who cannot make shift with such a
parliament, must have none, etc.) we may fairly suppose, that he is not more
serious in this than in most of his other positions, and, of course, that the
schemes presented to the public by real and pretended patriots, that is, (as he
says,) by those who have more honesty than sense, and those who have more sense
than honesty, are not the only objects of this subtle writer's irony, but that
he meant equally to ridicule the whole pack of their yelping opponents, even
his staunch old friends, the pensioned advocates for corruption and good
government, (as they are pleased to call it,) by setting them full cry upon
false scents of untenable arguments!

But, if I am deceived in attributing to him a deeper "sense," and more
"honesty" at bottom, than, perhaps, he is willing to acknowledge, yet I should
be sorry to fall into the contrary extreme of imputing to him any degree of
that unhappy disproportion between "sense" and "honesty" which he himself,
without the least scruple, so quaintly and facetiously imputes to every other
person that has written upon the subject! Common charity, therefore, obliges me
to give him credit, at least, for the honesty of meaning well, howsoever wide
his arguments may be from truth and loyalty; and, as to his sense, I have never
presumed to question it, but only the use, or rather the abuse, he has made of
it; for, after all, my hopes of being pardoned, for the freedom of these
remarks, must rely on his good sense, and I sincerely desire to experience so
notable an instance of it, though I am far from expecting the farther
satisfaction of receiving his thanks for my labor and pains in searching and
proposing an effectual remedy to the "one capital defect" of his most eligible
plan of reformation, because a removal of this defect (in his opinion, it
seems) would deprive the favored plan of "its chief excellence," viz. its
supposed impracticability; an excellence, however, to be relished only by
professed enemies to reformation and order! To be convinced of the
IMPRACTICABILITY of this scheme, (says he in p. 6.) let us but figure to
ourselves multitudes of all descriptions and denominations called out to
exercise their right of voting, inflamed by contest and intoxicated by liquor;
etc.

But it is more reasonable, in the first place, to consider the actual state of
things; "let us," therefore, rather figure to ourselves (what is really the
case at present) multitudes of all descriptions and denominations actually
called out (not indeed to exercise their RIGHT of voting, but what is far more
dangerous to the community) to exercise the WRONG of preventing others from
voting, by tumultuously obstructing every avenue to the poll-books, and raving
with all the horrible malice that the devil and drunkenness can inspire, that
they may intimidate and hinder quiet electors, that really have the right of
voting, from "exercising their right!" so that elections can be no longer free
whilst such notorious menacing, and open violence, is so generally tolerated!
Let us, also, "figure to ourselves" (for the horrible scenes have been too
recently imprinted on our memories to be easily effaced) these suborned
multitudes of all descriptions, and beyond all description, or of no
description at all, as much inflamed by contest and intoxicated by liquor as
they possibly could be, even if admitted to a "right of voting;" weavers from
their looms, and miners from tinneries and coal-pits; sailors from their ships,
and soldiers from their quarters; to whom we must add, (as the celebrated
author has done,) thousands of thieves, smugglers, rogues, vagabonds, and
vagrants; and we must add, also, select troops of Irish chairmen from the
environs of the polite gaming-houses, and whole bands of journeymen butchers,
the very scum and offal of all the shambles brandishing their formidable
cleavers! I say, let us figure to ourselves all these respectable hinderers and
obstructors of free election, let loose not only for "one day," but for many
days together, throughout every part of the kingdom, and such a scene of
confusion, of drunkenness and riot, of rapine and even of "murder!" etc. "will
present itself" (by due recollection of very recent facts, more strongly than
by mere imagination) "as must shock us," indeed, "with horror," and ought,
therefore, to convince us, that we already experience the most consummate
mischiefs and inconveniences that can possibly arise either from the multitude
or the meanness of the persons that usually attend elections! What then must we
think of the morality and patriotism of those persons, who regularly oppose
every attempt to reform these intolerable grievances and corruptions?

With respect to the danger which the celebrated author apprehends from all the
rabble being let loose in one day throughout every part of the kingdom, it is a
mere bugbear: are they not, at present, frequently let loose in one day
throughout every part of the kingdom, even "one day" in every week? Nay, are
they not at liberty any day, or every day, to be as "loose," if they please, as
those haughty persons who falsely esteem themselves so much their betters? and
yet, perhaps, they are not more licencious, though certainly much less guilty,
than their unprincipled CORRUPTORS, a great majority of "the honorable
gentlemen," as they call themselves, who solicit their favor at elections, to
whom all the mobs and all the mischiefs, on those occasions, are chiefly to be
attributed! for those men who bribe, treat, lead, and excite, these disorderly
multitudes, cannot surely be exempted, by their rank, titles, or fortunes, from
being deemed a part of the mob, when they are notoriously the most guilty and
vicious part of it, by being principals and movers of the rabble!

And such men should remember that the vile practice of opening houses, for
election purposes, is a species of bribery, not only the most pernicious to the
people and kingdom, but also the most effectually degrading to themselves;
because they are thereby absolutely incapacitated, in law, to take their seats,
(see note in p. 48.) and therefore all those persons, that may fairly be
convicted of this most pernicious and degrading misdemeanour, ought most
certainly (for the honor of the house) to be ejected! Let us also figure to
ourselves the present inconvenient and hopeless method of determining disputed
and undue elections, and also the lamentable number of them, by which the
precious time and attention of the great national council must be principally
engrossed, to the manifest hindrance of national business: whereas in ancient
times, when general elections throughout the kingdom were every year once and
more often if need be; viz. previous to every session of parliament, though the
sessions were held not only annually, but often twice, and sometimes three and
four times in a year, yet there were not above two or three cases of elections
questioned, or complained of, for above 200 years! (see "the Legal Means of
Political Reformation, p. 32 and 55.) so that a restoration of our ancient
parliamentary rights, and a due reformation of modern abuses and innovations,
are unquestionably necessary to be demanded now that the exercise of our
inestimable franchises are sunk down (through the enormous disproportion of
popular Representation) to the very lowest degree of possible existence, and
that all our public circumstances are really tainted with the most noxious
corruption imaginable! exceeding any superlative of it that can either be
expressed or even conceived! In short, there is but one degree lower, in
humiliation and baseness, to which the nation can possibly descend! and that
would be to adopt the wicked and disloyal position of this celebrated writer,
viz. that those who cannot make shift with such a parliament must have none.
For to be contented, like him, to make shift with such a parliament would
certainly be the lowest degree of parliamentary corruption; for it cannot
descend any lower, as I have already remarked, without actually losing its
existence, and therefore the one degree lower would be to admit this
gentleman's baneful alternative, the having no parliament at all; which is
certainly the lowest degree of POLITICAL SLAVERY!

The necessity, therefore, of a parliamentary reform is UNQUESTIONABLE,
notwithstanding this celebrated writer's "Thoughts" to the contrary; and the
practicability of it will be equally certain, if the constitutional remedy to
the present national immorality and corruption is but previously applied, viz.
a due re-establishment of the ancient VIEW of FRANKPLEDGE, with all its just
and legal usages and appendages; for this is the true state-antiseptic which
will sicken the worms of undue influence and put an effectual stop to their
baneful progress on the vitals of the English constitution; especially if some
farther reasonable and very necessary heads of enquiry be added to the articles
of annual inquest, which I have already stated in pages 112 to 132, and ought
to be inserted after the 33d article, ( Of all manner of conspirators,) leaving
the article, there distinguished by the number 34, for the conclusion of the
whole.

Item, (34.) Whether the Elections of members to parliament have been freely
and indifferently made without charge or expense, as required by the laws of
this kingdom? See 7 and 8 W. III. c.iv. A.D. 1695. and 2 Geo. II. c. 24. A. D.
1729. What person or persons have received bribes of any kind, or have eaten or
drunk (the most pernicious participation of bribery) at the expense of others
during the time of an election? The penalty of receiving any "reward
whatsoever" on such occasions is 500l. besides an incapacity from ever voting
again: see stat. 2 Geo. II. c. 24. And meat and drink, entertainment or
provision, are expressly deemed articles of reward in the previous statute of
king William. See note in p. 48.

35. What attorneys, or other persons, have been agents in distributing money,
or other reward of any kind, or in promising reward or emolument during the
time of an election?

36. What public houses have been opened (a term sufficiently understood by the
notorious practice of it) for the purpose of influencing any election, after
the test of the writ, or after the place became vacant? and who has paid (or
has undertaken to pay, and is, directly or indirectly, responsible) for the
expenses incurred by such public and unlawful entertainment? If the proofs on
this head can be fairly traced, so as to criminate the persons elected, they
are thereby effectually incapacitated from holding their unjustly-acquired
seats in parliament, and by virtue of the abovementioned statute of 7 and 8
William III. are to be deemed and taken no members in parliament, and shall not
act, sit, or have any vote or place, etc. as if they had never been returned or
elected members for the parliament; and the act does not limit the conviction
to any fixed period of time after the offense; so that there is ample leisure
and opportunity for researches on that head; which all true friends to the
honor and dignity of parliament ought to promote.

37. What publican or victualler has supplied meat, drink, entertainment, or
provision, during the time of an election, to any person or persons whom they
might justly have suspected of not intending to pay for the same at their own
cost and charge? For, in this case, the publican is as much a criminal agent in
bribery, as the petty-fogging attorney who bribes with cash, notes, or
promises, and is equally liable to all the penalties of bribery.

38. And what person has made any disbursements or expenditure whatsoever,
either in his own behalf, or in trust for others, or even promise of
expenditure, or repayment, directly or indirectly, to promote such dishonest
and baneful practices against the peace and welfare of the community?

There is no doubt but that regular annual enquiries upon oath, in all parts of
the kingdom, on these points, would put an effectual stop to the expenses and
corruption of elections, and consequently to the tumults and other immoralities
of them, whereby the trite argument against the constitutional frequency of
elections would, of course, be superseded; so that the ancient right of newly
electing our representatives for every session of parliament might again be
happily restored, without either inconvenience to the electors, or expense to
the candidates.

And lastly, as the original intention of these legal divisions of the people
into tithings and hundreds was obviously for military, as well as civil,
purposes, some other additional articles of enquiry will also be necessary to
re-establish and maintain the ancient legal military duties of the people in a
regular WATCH and WARD throughout the kingdom, in order to prevent every
species of robbery, riot, or other violence whatsoever, by internal enemies, as
well as to be thoroughly prepared, without the enormous and ruinous expense
which at present is thought necessary against the apprehension of invasions by
foreign enemies.

That this was an ancient object of enquiry at views of Frankpledge is
manifest, by the article which I cited from Fleta, in p. 138. n. viz. Item de
vigiliis non observatis. Also concerning watches not duly observed.

That the ancient and true constitution of the English state absolutely
requires every man (the clergy and judges excepted) to have arms, and to be
duly trained and exercised in the use of them, I have amply proved in my Tracts
on the Means of National Defense; so that, from thence, it will be very easy to
form such additional articles of enquiry as may be necessary to restore and
preserve these two great national objects, the general arming and training of
the people to military services, in WATCH and WARD; whereby the imaginary
necessity of maintaining a numerous standing army in constant pay (the most
dangerous and unconstitutional of all our modern innovations) will be
effectually superseded, and, of course, a probable means and opportunity would
thereby be laid open to a virtuous administration of government (a title that
will most certainly be due to any administration that shall adopt and restore
the just and free constitution of tithings and hundreds in their ancient legal
purity) of crowning their success, in reformation, with an effectual reduction
of the national debt and taxes, by means of the great annual savings that would
arise from a proper gradual decrease I say a gradual decrease, because I wish
the reduction of our armies to be made without injury or any material
inconvenience to the brave officers and men that have faithfully served
therein, to whom are certainly due all the kindness and reasonable liberality
that the nation can afford to show them: and, though I am a professed enemy to
STANDING ARMIES in general, yet, at the same time, I profess, and really
entertain, a very cordial regard and benevolence to the deserving individuals,
of which they are composed. The kind of reduction, therefore, which I wish to
see, is such as they themselves, I believe, would not think either unjust or
hard upon them: and yet, I trust, that the savings, arising from it, would be
as effectual and speedy as those of any other plan that the nation can (with
consistent honor and due liberality to the parties) adopt. Let us, therefore,
suppose a reduction to be made by time rather than by the involuntary discharge
of any one; and by putting an entire step to recruiting, and to the granting of
any new commissions, rather than by the stoppage of pay. Let discharges,
however, be freely granted to all that request them; and let liberal bounties
(in proportion to rank and pay) be given, to incite such requests; that
industrious subaltern officers and men may be encouraged and enabled to engage
themselves in civil occupations. A preference should also be given, in the
disposal of lucrative civil employments under the crown, (in such employments,
I mean, as are necessary to be continued) to deserving officers that are
properly qualified for them, provided they give up their military commissions
and profession; which would much hasten the reduction of the army and its
expenses.

The corpse of Engineers and the regiment of Artillery, however, are branches of
the military establishment which cannot so safely be reduced, or, at least, not
in so great a degree, as the other military corpse, because they cannot so
easily as other regiments be raised again, in case of any sudden want of them;
a regular education being necessary for engineers and artillery officers in the
study of mathematics, projectiles, mechanics, military architecture, surveying,
drawing, etc. But a proper establishment in these two branches (duly maintained
in study and practice) would, in case of any sudden emergency, enable the
present national militia, and the trained hundreds and thousands, or HOSTS of
the people, in their rotations of service, to oppose, with sufficient effect,
any power (humanly speaking) that could possibly be brought against them. I
have here supposed the national militia to remain on its present establishment;
for, though I contend that the hundreds and tithings, when duly trained, form
the true constitutional militia of this kingdom, yet, until that happy legal
constitution can be so effectually re-established as to be deemed of itself
sufficient for the national defense, I should be very unwilling to propose any
alteration in the present establishment of militia for the counties, except,
indeed, some such obvious amendments as may render it less burdensome and
ruinous to poor laborers, by throwing a more adequate proportion of the
expense upon those that can better afford it: and also to prevent any man from
being detained from home (after he is duly disciplined) longer than a month (or
six weeks at most) at any one time in actual service, lest he should thereby
lose his civil occupation and become a mere soldier. See Tracts on the Means of
National Defense by a free Militia, p. 47, 59, 66-68, 86, 87.


of the duties of our present military establishments.

The duties of watch and ward, or guard, were rendered light and easy, by an
equal service of the whole body of the people "in rotation;" for which the
modern term is "a roster of service." See "Leges Gulielmi Regis," as published
in Lambard's Archionomia, (1st edit. 4 to 1568. fol. 125.) Statuimus, etc. We
ordain that all the Cities, and Boroughs, and Castles, and Hundreds, and
Wapentakes, of our whole kingdom aforesaid shall every night be watched and
guarded IN GYRUM (i. e. into a circle, or rather by "a ROTATION" viz. a roster
of service) against crimes and enemies, according as the sherifes, and
aldermen, and magistrates, and our ministers, shall best provide, by common
council, for the welfare of the kingdom. And a little farther he adds,
statuimus et firmiter praecipimus, etc. We ordain and strictly command that all
earls, barons, knights, ministers, (servientes or sergeants,) and ALL THE
FREEMEN of our whole kingdom aforesaid, (universi liberi homines totius regni
nostri praedicti,) shall have and hold themselves always well IN ARMS and
horses, as it is fit and right, and that they may be always ready and prepared
to fulfill their ENTIRE SERVICE TO US, and effectually to act whenever there
shall be occasion, according to the duly which they ought to do of right (de
jure) to us, for their lands and tenements, and according as we command them by
the COMMON COUNCIL, (i. e. by the parliament) of the whole kingdom aforesaid.
And this ENTIRE SERVICE TO THE KING, thus duly limited by the national COMMON
COUNCIL of the WHOLE KINGDOM, was rendered still more suitable to the dignity
of a free people, by the ENTIRE ELECTION also, among themselves, of all their
officers; not only of the tithing-men (who had the civil power of constables,
and the military authority of sergeants) and of the hundreders (who had the
civil authority of high-constables and justiciaries, and the military rank of
captains) but also of the viscounts or sherifs, and of the heretochii, the
commanders or leaders of the army; "DUCTORES EXERCITUS." The same (says the
learned judge Atkins See judge Atkins's "parliamentary and political tracts,"
p. 253, 254. "Sir Edw. Coke, in his 2d Inst." (says judge Atkins,) in his
exposition of the statute of Westminster, 1 cap. 10. concerning the election of
the coroners by the freeholders (which ever was so, and so still continues)
says, there is the same reason for election of sheriffs and so (says he) it
anciently was by writ directed to the coroners. In like manner (continues judge
Atkins) were the conservators of the peace chosen, in whose place the justices
of the peace now succeed, and so the verdurers of the forest are to this day.
These were great and high liberties, and did belong to the freeholders (by
which he must mean the liberi tenentes, the free holders in burgage tenure,
viz. the householders or Deceners, as well as others) from all antiquity, and
are strong arguments to confirm those late authors that will by no means allow
of a limited government, but leave us under an arbitrary power, and who call
our laws and liberties but the concessions and condescensions from the regal
and absolute power.
) as in the dialect of this present age, may be called the lord-lieutenants, or
deputy lieutenants. For this the learned judge refers us to the law of K.
Edward above cited "Isti vero viri" (speaking of the HERETOCHII) eligebantur
per commune concilium pro communi utilitate regni, per provincias et patrias
universas et per singulos comitatus in PLENO FOLKMOTE This full folkmote for
the election of heretoches, or lord-lieutenants, and of the sheriffs, was
ordered to be held every year in the beginning of October, by the same law.
Item aliud folkmote esse debet in quolibet comitatu per provincias et patrias
totius regni praedicti universas, scilicet in capite kl. October. ad providendum
ibi quis erit vice-comes, et qui erunt eorum beretochii, et ad audiendum ibi
justa eorum precepta concilio et assensu procerum et judicio folksmote, etc.
, sicut et VICECOMITES provinciarum et comitatuum ELIGI DEBENT. "This law"
(says the learned judge Atkins) "mentions this election as an use and custom."

I must, however, remark, that this quotation is taken from that part of K.
Edward's laws which is printed in italics in Mr. Lambard's edition, and which
Mr. Prynne calls a "spurious addition," and he cites a much higher authority
(that of the learned Abp. Usher) for the same opinion. Mr. Lambard himself,
however, informs us, that there were two different exemplars, the one per
antiquum, "very ancient;" and "the other" (says he) is not, indeed, so ancient;
which, however, contains more ( alterum non ita sane vetus, quod tamen plura
complectatur.) And he informs us, that he himself, after making a diligent
comparison of them, had joined both together, in such a manner, however, (says
he,) that the whole of the old exemplar is expressed in the LARGER letters, (i.
e. the Roman,) but whatever is expressed in the LESSER characters (the Italics)
is to be attributed (says he) to the LATER copy ( quae minoribus vero
describuntur caracteribus, ea recentiori sunt tribuenda. But he does not
express the least suspicion that the latter is spurious; and he was surely a
very competent judge of that matter, as being one of the most eminent
antiquarians of his time. And the rev. Dr. David Wilkins, who printed an
edition of the Anglo-Saxon Laws, in 1721, has set forth the laws of K. Edward,
without distinguishing* by Roman and Italic letters, the various readings of
the two eminent exemplars before mentioned, (as Lambard and Whelock had done
before him,) so that he manifestly thought it right to adopt the additions in
italics, as properly belonging to the text (though rejected by Mr. Prynne,) or
he would not thus have omitted the distinctions between the two exemplars.

Whatever objections Abp. Usher might have had to some of the historical
circumstances related in this exemplar of K. Edward's laws, (as, for instance,
the correspondence between pope Elutherius and the British king Lucius, the
extensive conquests of king Arthur, etc.) yet, as these circumstances were
generally received for historical facts long before the fourth year of K.
William I. (when these Laws of Edward were newly collected These laws were
newly collected in the 4th year of K. William I. by a parliament elected and
called together expressly for that purpose; and the manner of the
representation was remarkable. Twelve representatives were elected for each
county of the whole kingdom, and were sworn before the king (after the manner
of a jury) that they would, to the best of their power, without departing
either to the right or the left from the path of truth, declare their laws and
customs, nothing omitting, nothing adding, nothing changing, by prevarication,
etc. Post acquisitionem Angliae, praesatus Rex Angliae Guli^lmu^ quarto anno
regni ^ui, consillo Baronum suorum fecit summoniti per universos Angliae
consulatus Anglos nobile^, sapientes, et sua lege eruditos, ut eorum leges, and
jura; and consuetudines abipsis audiret. Electi igitur de singulis totius
patriae comitatibus, viri Duodecem, jurejurando coram rege primum
confirmaverunt, ut quoad possent recto tramite incedentes, nec ad dextram nec
ad sinistram divertentes, legum suarum and consuetudinum sancita patefacerent,
nihil praetermittentes, nil addentes, nil praevaricando mutantes. A legibus
igitur sanctae matris ecclesiae sumentes exordium, quoniam per eam Rex and
regnum solidum subsistendi habet fundamentum, leges, libertates, and paces
ipsius concionati sunt, dicentes.
and digested into the present form, as appears by the first article) the
insertion of them into a manuscript, alleged to be of that age, cannot (even if
they were false) afford any proof against the originality of the manuscript,
because the writers of that age, in general, believed these circumstances to be
facts, and might, therefore, with great probability, be supposed to have
inserted them.

And, as to Mr. Prynne's exception in his brief animadversions, etc. on the
fourth part of the Institutes, etc. compiled by Sir Edw. Coke, p. 189.) it is
manifestly founded on a mere literal error of the transcriber of the M. S.
which by no means injures the general credit of the copy, and its other
contents. Mr. Prynne says, I cannot but take notice of one gross mistake, in
the spurious addition to the laws of K. Edward the confessor, in Mr. Lambert,
cited in the 2d Inst. p. 70. concerning the antiquity of the folkmote, or court
leet; and administering the oath of allegiance in it to the people; ad
defendendum regnum, etc. Hanc legem invenit ARTHURUS ( qui quondam fuit
inclytissimus rex BRITONUM) et ita consolidavit et confoederavit regnum
BRITANNIAE universum semper in unum. Hujus legis AUTHORITATE (meaning the
authority or happy effect of free- folkmotes, or court-leets, i. e. the
incomparable constitution of Frankpledge, which I now wish to recommend for the
same purpose, viz. to unite the whole nation in one confederated body by a
universal establishment of the law which Arthur found, with all its just and
legal usages) expulit ARTHURUS praedictus SARACENOS et inimicos a regno. When,
as it is most clear (says Mr. Prynne) by Galfridus Monmuthensis, Mat.
Westminster, Radulfus Cestrensis, Ponticus Verumnius, etc. An. Dom. 516 to 542;
and other our ancient and modern historians, who write of king Arthur, record,
that he only fought his several battles with the Saxons, Scots, Picts, whom he
expelled out of the realm, but not with the SARACENS, who never infested nor
entered our Island, nor mention any such oath, law, court, prescribed or held
by him. Now that K. ARTHUR fought with the Saxons, Scots, Picts, etc. must be
readily allowed, and also that he fought not with the SARACENS; but if we
consider the mention of "SARACENOS" as a mere literary mistake of an ignorant
transcriber for SCANIOS or SCANDIOS, (an ancient name, much less known to the
vulgar at the time when this copy was wrote, than that of the SARACENS,) there
will be no cause for farther cavil against the authenticity of the copy,
because such a mistake in a copy ought not to injure the credit of the original
compiler of the work. And that the word SCANIOS, or SCANDIOS, was really
intended, is manifest from the context (two pages farther) wherein express
mention is made of K. Arthur's conquest of Scantia and Gutland, the countries
from whence proceeded the most of Arthur's enemies, even the Saxons themselves
originally, (see Sheringham de Anglorum Gentis Origin,) if not the Picts also,
the very nations mentioned by Mr. Prynne himself, and also by all the authors
to whom he has appealed.

There is just such another mere literal mistake, a few pages farther, which,
without proper warning, might still farther induce a superficial reader to
suspect the authenticity of the exemplar; I mean the passage where mention is
made of the election of king Ina, viz. qui electus suit in regem per ANGELUM,
who was elected king through (or by means of) "AN ANGEL, (a very improbable
circumstance,) instead of the obvious meaning of the original writer, i. e. "
per ANGLIAM" " throughout ENGLAND." For, this latter sense is clearly supported
by the context immediately following, which relates, that Ina first obtained
the monarchy of this WHOLE KINGDOM, etc. et qui PRIMO obtinuit monarchiam
TOTIUS REGNI HUJUS post adventum ANGLORUM in Brytanniam. PRIMUS enim fuit rex
coronatus ANGLORUM ET BRYTONUM SIMUL MANENTIUM IN BRITANNIA post adventum
Saxonum, etc. And a little farther the text relates that he obtained Wales and
Cornwall by his second wife, as also the consecrated British crown, which
belonged to the last British king, Cadwallader; so that the circumstance
manifestly intended to be expressed was the general acknowledgement of INA, as
king over both the ENGLISH and the BRITONS, that is, "per Angliam," throughout
all England; and not "per Angelum." Nevertheless these two palpable errors of
transcribers have been copied in all the subsequent editions of K. Edward's
laws, without the least animadversion of the publishers to clear the original
compilers, and their work, from the discredit of such improbable circumstances.

With respect to Mr. Prynne's objection to the antiquity of the hundred courts,
as declared in this addition to K. Edward's laws, viz. that "Arthur found this
law," "Hanc legem invenit Arthurus," etc. "and so" (by means thereof) united
and confederated the whole kingdom of Britain into one, (et ita consolidavit et
confoederavit regnum Britanniae universum semper in unum;) and that by virtue
of THIS LAW the said Arthur drove the SCANTIANS (or Scandinavinians) and
enemies out of the kingdom, etc. I must observe that Mr. Prynne has assigned
nothing but negative evidence against the fact, which is by no means sufficient
to disprove it. On the other hand, as Arthur did really succeed in uniting and
strengthening the kingdom against his enemies, the other part of the sentence
is the more probable, (that he found this law,) because he certainly could not
have pursued a more effectual and speedy means of restoring a divided and
weakened kingdom than by reviving and enforcing "this law," which he is said to
have found; and, had he been as careful, after his success, to maintain "this
law," and to establish it in the countries which he conquered, with free and
equal liberty to all the inhabitants, the happy effects of his success would
not have had so short a duration.

For, though the Britons certainly had "this law" both before and after the
time of Arthur, yet they generally had it rather in name than in use, or else
they would certainly have been less dissolute in their morals, and more united
and powerful against their enemies. They had "this law," I may say, much in the
same manner as we have it at this day; it was really the law of the kingdom,
but not duly maintained; the nominal divisions remained, as at present, but
these divisions became local instead of popular; the mere divisions of space,
instead of exact numerical divisions of the people, which "this law" requires
to be effective. A sufficient answer to Mr. Prynne's objection, against the
antiquity of "this law," may be gathered from a former part of this tract, (p.
33-36.) where I have referred to ample evidence that the divisions of hundreds
and tithings (CENTURIAE CENTURIATA COMITIA. Those Comitia, or assemblies of the
people of Rome, by Centuries, where every one gave his vote in his century.
These sorts of assemblies were first instituted by Servius Tullius, who
divided, as is above said, the people into six classes, and each classis into
CENTURIES. These assemblies had a great share in ordering of all state affairs,
for they were summoned together to make great officers, to approve any new law,
to proclaim war against any people, and to implead any citizen of Rome after
his death. They also chose the consuls, praetors, censors, and sometimes the
proconsuls and chief priests, etc. See Danet's Dict. of Greek and Roman
antiquities. What difficulty then can there be in supposing that "Arthur found
this law" among the Britons, who so lately before had been incorporated in the
Roman colonies of this island?
and DECURIAE Romulus having at first divided the Roman people into three
tribes, he appointed, at the head of each tribe, a colonel to command it, (i.
e. the head of a thousand,) and afterward divided each tribe into TEN Curiae,
or companies, and appointed a centurion or captain to command an hundred men,
and a decurion to command ten men. Ibid. on the word Decurio.
) were in use with the Roman colonies in Britain, both in their civil and
military government; and that the Britons were incorporated in those colonies;
so that it was very natural for the Britons afterward to retain something of
the same kind (though badly observed) in the civil constitution of Britain,
differing, for the most part, only in names and titles, from the future Saxon
constitution: as, for instance, (according to information Verum quod modo
vocatur comitatus, olim apud Britones temporibus Romanorum in regno isto
Brytanniae vocabatur consulatus. Et qui modo vocantur vicecomites, tunc
temporis vice consules vocabantur, ille vero dicebatur viceconsul, qui consule
absente ipsius vicea supplebat in jure et in foro. Leges Edwardi Regis (No 12.)
from this copy of K. Edward's laws,) what is now called a COUNTY was formerly
with the BRITONS in the times of the ROMANS in this kingdom of BRITAIN called
CONSULATUS. And those who are now called VICECOMITES (or sheriffs) were then
called VICE-CONSULES, and he that was called VICE-CONSUL was the person, who,
in the absence of the consul, supplied his place in the law and in the COURT
Not only land-owners, but also householders, and even all the inhabitants of a
county are to be deemed suitors to the county court. County court est le court
de viscount PUR TOUTS LES INHABITANTS deins le county. This is the remark of
the learned Mr. H. Finch in his Nomotechnia, (p. 115.) on the statute of
Merton, c. 10. which ordains, that every freeman which owes SUIT to the
COUNTY, TRYTHING, HUNDRED and WAPENTAKE, or to the court of the lord, may
freely make his attorney to do those SUITS for him. And this must necessarily
be understood from the very nature of Frankpledge, because every man, according
to this constitutional law, must be incorporated in some tithing and hundred,
which are the regular component parts of every county court, and not the mere
landholders alone, as some persons of late have erroneously conceived.
. And therefore, I think, we may safely admit the assertion in this copy of K.
Edward's law, that Arthur found this law, (notwithstanding the authority of Mr.
Prynne to the contrary,) and that the success of the British monarch in uniting
and confederating, by it, his whole kingdom against foreign and domestic
enemies is an example perfectly suitable to the purpose of my present work At
the time when K. Arthur is said to have "found this law," it was, perhaps, no
more in general use than it is at present; for WE, even at this day, may also
be said to "find this law," that is, we find it mentioned in all the
law-writers of the best authority, as being the law and constitution of the
kingdom, though the usage is certainly lost. In a case solemnly argued in the
court of common pleas, even so late as the 5th K. James, the custom of
Frankpledge was considered as still existing in law, though it certainly did
not exist in usage. "And it seemed to the court," (says the reporter, Sir Edw.
Coke,) that they cannot adjudge him a CHIEF PLEDGE upon that verdict, (the
circumstances of which are there mentioned,) for LEETS were divided in DECURIAS
or DECENNAS, unde dicitur DECENARII to this day; and out of every TEN, (and one
of them being pledge for the other, from whence the court was called CURIA
VISUS FRANCI-PLEGII) one was called CAPITALIS PLEGIUS, seu PRIMARIUS FIDEI
JUSSOR; and in some places, at this day, he is called the TITHING-MAN, and, in
Yorkshire, TENMANTALE. And a little farther he adds, and it appears by the
said act of 18 Edw. II. that it ought to be enquired at the LEET, if all the
CHIEF PLEDGES, with their DECENNERS, that is, the other NINE, appears, by which
it appears, that the TENTH principal man was the CHIEF PLEDGE, etc. VI Report
78.
. And, with respect to the variations in these two copies of K. Edward's laws,
collated by Mr. Lambard, I may now safely remark, (after having removed some of
the principal objections,) that the variations which remain are not such as
contradict each other in the least: and, though there is still another copy in
Roger de Hoveden's annals See Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores post Bedam Piaecipui,
etc. p. 343-348. London 1596.
, which contains the same laws for the most part, but with many various
readings, and without the historical additions, yet these several copies
contain no variations, upon the whole, which can justify a rejection of any one
of them in favor of another: for it is probable that the most learned and
loyal people amongst the English, in the 4th year of K. William I. would be
induced, at that time particularly, to prepare collections of their old laws,
that they might report and obtain a confirmation of them in the parliament that
was then called (a regular jury of 12 "sapientes, et sua lege eruditos," "wise
or discrete men, and learned in their law," being required to be elected and
deputed by each county) expressly for the purpose of reporting these laws: and
that historical parts were probably added to some one of the collections even
at that time (for no subsequent time was so likely to give occasion for such an
addition) by some one or more of these learned representatives, in order to
assert the antiquity as well as the certain efficacy of the excellent
constitution of Frankpledge, by the eminent examples of the British K. ARTHUR,
and of the Saxon king EDGAR, who, both of them, found this law, and experienced
the happy effects of reviving and enforcing it.


. This law also provides, in terms equally strong, for the general arming of
the people, as the act of K. William does for "the entire service of the king,"
see "cap. 35. de Greve." DEBENT enim UNIVERSI LIBERI HOMINES TOTIUS REGNI,
juxta facultates suas et possessiones, et juxta catalla sua, et secundum feodum
suum, et secundum tenementa sua, ARMA HABERE, et illa semper prompta conservare
ad tuitionem regni, etc.

That ALL FREEMEN OF THE WHOLE kingdom, according to their means, etc. OUGHT
TO HAVE ARMS, and those always to keep ready for the defense of the kingdom.

By the same law they were restrained from pawning their arms. Non debent illa
invadiare, (i. e. pignori ponere,) nex extra regnum vendere, sed hoeredibus
suis in extremis legare, etc. That they ought not to pledge them, nor sell them
out of the kingdom, but bequeath them to their heirs, etc.

And, to secure obedience to this law, all men, "universi," were obliged, one
certain day every year to show their arms, throughout the whole kingdom, in the
cities, in the boroughs, in the castles, in the hundreds and wapentakes of the
kingdom, which ought to be done (says this law) in the same day throughout the
whole kingdom, lest any persons should accommodate their friends and
acquaintance, with their arms, and they themselves receive them back in return,
and thereby defraud the justice of the king, and injure the king and kingdom
Universi vero praedicti singulis annis in crastino purificationis beatae Mariae
debent omni excusatione remota arma sua per universum regnum ostendere,
scilicet in civitatibus regni, et in Burgis, et in Castellis, et Hundredis, et
Wapen achiis, Regni, secundum eis quod statutum est, et adjudicatum, et juxta
quod debent, et idcirco hoc fieri debet uno eodem die per universum regnum ut
predictum est, ne aliqui possint arma sua familiaribus suis et notis
accommodare, nec ipsi illa mutuo accipere, ac justitiam domini regis
defraudare, et dominum regem et regnum offendere.
.

And the same law also commanded a just and exact observance of the watch duty,
which could be no otherwise, in those ancient times, than by a regular rotation
of all the people, in gyrum, as described in king William's law, and they were
afterward carefully to provide against fires, when they returned home to their
houses. Et ut WARDAE, (i. e. vigiliae vel custodiae) just et rite observentur,
et ut caute deinceps incendiis sibi illic provideant, cum ad propria redibunt.

The duty of watch and guard, by the people, was deemed so very important in
ancient times, (and surely ought still so to be,) especially in towns and
places of more than ordinary resort, that the law prohibited the holding of
markets and fairs in all places except those that were duly enclosed and
fortified, and, in which, of course, the inhabitants ought, according to the
common law, to perform the duties of watch and guard, and be always prepared
and trained in arms, as above described, for the entire service of the king, in
the true legal sense of service, i. e. for the preservation of the king's peace
in the effectual prevention of all tumults and riots; for aiding and assisting
the king's courts and their legal officers in the due process of the law, and
for the effectual security of all peaceable traders and their property. See
Leges Gulielmi Regis. Item nullum mercatum vel forum sit, nec fieri permittatur
nisi in CIVITATIBUS regni nostri, et in BURGIS CLAUSIS, et MURO VALLATIS, et
CASTELLIS, et LOCIS TUTISSIMIS, ubi consuetudines regni nostri, et jus nostrum
commune, et dignitates coronae nostroe, quoe constitutoe sunt a bonis
praedecessoribus nostris, deperire non possunt, nec violari, sed omnia rite, et
per JUDICIUM, et JUSTITIAM fieri debent. Et ideo CASTELLA, (not private
castles, but such only as had a regular establishment of civil magistrates,) et
burgi, et civitates sunt et fundatoe et oedificatoe, scilicet, ad tuitionem
gentium et populorum regni, et ad defensionem regni, et idcirco observari
debent cum omni liberate, et integritate, et ratione. Also no MARKET or FAIR
may be, nor may be permitted to be, except in the cities of our kingdom, and in
enclosed boroughs, fenced with a wall, and in castles, and most secure places,
where the usages of our kingdom, (so that private castles cannot here be meant,
but such castles only as were governed by regular magistrates, according to the
common law, as Newcastle, Chester, Rochester, Colchester, Cirencester,
Bicester, etc.) and our common law and the dignities of our crown, etc. may not
be lost nor defrauded, nor violated; but all things ought to be done in due
form, and by JUDGMENT and JUSTICE. And, for this cause, castles, (hereby
manifestly intending such castles only as I have described,) and boroughs, and
cities, are established and built, viz. for the security of nations and people,
and for the defense of a kingdom, and therefore they ought to be maintained
with all liberty, integrity, and reason. Thus every city, town, and borough,
was supposed to contain, within itself, a complete establishment for
maintaining the common law, and the dignities of the crown, and for doing all
things in due form, and by JUDGMENT and JUSTICE, which certainly could not, in
any other way, be effected, than by these numerical divisions of the people; in
which the magistracy was always duly proportioned to the number of inhabitants,
so that whether they were many or few, they were all equally manageable. And
the rotation of duty, by being regularly circulated amongst all men, was
reduced and rendered easy to all. The cities of the Israelites under the
theocracy had the same proportion of magistrates exactly which our common law
requires, and also regular rotations of public service; but it does not appear
that they had our happy constitution of juries, whereby unexceptionable and
impartial persons from among the people, that are neighbors to the parties and
the facts, in every cause, are appointed the LEGAL JUDGES of it. Had this
indispensable constitution been a part of their law, as it is of ours, it is
probable they would not so soon have fallen away from justice and judgment:
for they had no sufficient guard against partiality. If a man was accused, he
had no right to reject the magistrate from being his judge, even though he knew
him to be his enemy, or the friend and favourer of his accuser: whereas in
England, a man may challenge and reject 35 jurymen, if he thinks fit, p^evious
to the trial of a charge of treason, and 20 jurymen previous to trials for any
other felonies, without assigning any reason against them, which is called
peremptory challenge; and he may challenge as many more as he can produce just
and legal exceptions against, which is called "challenge with cause." The total
want of this just regulation laid the magistrates of the Israelitish cities
more open to the temptation of bribery than they would otherwise have been; and
afterward, under the monarchy, when these heads of thousands were appointed by
the king, instead of the people, the want of juries became still more apparent;
for, if the process against any man was directed by the king's letters, or
under his seal, as in the case of Naboth, the judges were tempted to preserve
only the mere outward form of the law, without the spirit and intention of it:
they would not condemn indeed without a legal number of witnesses were set up
to accuse, but then there was no jury to determine whether or not these
accusers were credible witnesses, which the law equally required at that time,
as it does at present. But in every other respect the government of the
Israelitish cities seems (as I have said) to have been similar to what our
common law requires. The Rev. Dr. Sam. Croxall, formerly archdeacon of Salop,
has drawn up an account of the Rulers of Cities See his SCRIPTURE POLITICS,
chap. 8.. xv. concerning the RULERS of CITIES, p. 465, 466, 467, 468, 471, 472,
473, 475, 476, 477.

The third wheel of their government, which, as we mentioned before, turned
within the other two, was the constitution and magistracy of every city within
itself. As the weight of superintending the affairs of every tribe was much
lightened to the prince thereof, by the subordinate jurisdiction of the heads
of families; the political burden of these latter was, in like manner,
considerably alleviated by the share of authority which appertained to the
rulers of cities: Every tribe having several cities belonging to it, and every
city being inhabited by a great number of families.

The chief magistrate in these corporations was called the ruler of the city. *
* * *

Some have questioned whether there were not more than one of these chief
magistrates in every city: That there were many subordinate ones, having
gradual authority under one another, is very plain; and that these were the
same whom Moses constituted to be judges of the people in the wilderness, by
the advice of Jethro his father-in-law. Exodus xviii. 25. He chose able men out
of all Israel, (but I have already proved that the able men were really elected
by the people,) and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands,
rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens. And they judged the
people at all seasons: The hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small
matter they judged themselves.

When, therefore, the tribes came to have cities belonging to them, there these
magistrates presided and exercised their jurisdiction. Which consisted
principally of these three parts. First, to convene and hold senates and
councils, in order to enact such bylaws as were expedient for that body
corporate, of which they were members. Secondly, to commission and authorize
the judges to enter upon and to determine, in the judiciary way, such small
matters as lay properly within their cognizance. And, thirdly, to make a part
of the great council of the nation, as often as it was summoned to assemble by
that person who held the helm of government.

These are they who are intended in that precept, where it is said, Deuteronomy. xvi.
18. judges and officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord
thy God gives thee throughout thy tribes. Which officers we find mentioned
upon other occasions. Deuteronomy. xxix. 10. Ye stand this day all of you before the
Lord your God; your captains of your tribes, your elders, and your officers.
Again, Moses says, Deuteronomy. xxxi. 28. Gather unto me all the elders of your
tribes, and your officers. And we find Joshua, when he was old and stricken in
age, Joshua xxiii. 2. called for all Israel, and for their elders, and for
their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers.

So when David calls together the great congregation to declare his purpose
about the building of the temple, 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 1. we read of the captains
over the thousands, and the captains over the hundreds, with the officers,
being summoned upon that occasion. And, afterward, we are told that Solomon
made a speech unto all Israel, 2 Chronicles. i. 2. to the captains of thousands, and
of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all Israel, the chief
of the fathers. And thus, when that pious prince Hezekiah was resolved upon a
reformation both of religion and manners, throughout his kingdom, it is said, 2 Chronicles. xxix. 20. Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of
the city, and went up to the house of the Lord.

As to their judiciary capacity, they were not, strictly speaking, judges
themselves, but had the power of admitting what causes they thought were proper
to come before the judges, and of rejecting what they looked upon as frivolous
or unnecessary to be enquired into. * * * * * *

Of the judiciary authority of these rulers, we read farther in the case of
Jeremiah. When (another) Micaiah had heard his prophetical denunciations
against Israel and Judah, Jer. xxxvi. 11. he went down into the king's house,
into the scribe's chamber, where all the princes (these rulers) were sitting,
and informed them of it. And after, when Jeremiah was going out of the city
into the land of Benjamin, Irijah, who suspected that he was going to desert to
the army of the Chaldeans, who were lately broken up from besieging the city,
Jer. xxxvii. 12. took Jeremiah and brought him to the princes. Wherefore the
princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in prison.

And upon his farther prophesying that the city should be given into the band
of the king of Babylon, Therefore the princes said unto the king, We beseech
thee, let this man be put to death. Then Zedekiah the king said, Behold he is
in your hand; for the king is not he that can do any thing against you. Which
shows that they bore a mighty sway in the great council of the nation; and
that, when they prayed judgment and execution against any one, even the king
thought it most safe and prudent to comply with them.

The number of these rulers, in every city, was in proportion to the number of
its inhabitants; as many thousands as it contained, so many rulers, of that
rank and denomination, belonged to it; from which regulation, the estimation
and consequence of each city was discernible at one view. And from this
consideration arises that fine allusion of one of the prophets concerning the
place where Christ should be born; so understood and applied by the chief
priests and scribes themselves, as the Evangelist informs us. Mat. ii. 5. Mic.
v. 2. But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands
of Judah, (in comparison of those cities that have rulers of thousands
belonging to them,) yet out of thee he shall come forth unto me, that is, to be
ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been of old, from everlasting. So
exactly was almost every minute circumstance, relating to the Savior of
mankind, delineated and foretold by those divinely-inspired writers, who lived
so many hundred years before he came into the world. * *

Captains of Thousands, etc.

The rest of the officers that governed the army we find called by the titles
of captains of thousands, captains of hundreds, captains of fifties, and
captains of tens. Who probably were of the same rank with those whom Moses
constituted, in the wilderness, rulers of thousands, etc. and, at first, acted
in a double capacity, being at the same time civil magistrates and military
officers.

The captains of thousands seem to have been much the same as colonels of
regiments with us; and the captains of hundreds might probably answer to those
who, in our army, have the command of troops and companies; the captains of
fifties and tens, to our subalterns, sergeants and corporals.

Among the list of David's adherents while he fled from Saul, 1 Chronicles. xii.
1.14. and kept himself close at Ziklag; after several names mentioned, it is
said; These were of the sons of God, captains of the host: one of the least was
over an hundred, and the greatest over a thousand. Again, we read of others
said, 1 Chronicles. xii. 20. to be captains of the thousands that were of Manasseh.
And, when David had thoughts of bringing the Ark of God from Kirjathjearim, we
are told, 1 Chronicles. xiii. 1. he consulted with the captains of thousands, and
hundreds, and with every leader. And again, when he declared his intentions
about building the temple, it is said that he, 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 1. assembled
all the princes of Israel, the princes of the tribes, and the captains of the
companies that ministered to the king by course, and the captains over the
thousands, and the captains over the hundreds.

So when Jehoiada the high priest had a mind to bring on the restoration, by
declaring Joash to be king, 2 Kings xi. 4. he sent for the rulers over
hundreds, with the captains, and the guard, and showed them the king's son; and
gave them proper instructions what they were to do. And the captains over the
hundreds did according to all things that Jehoiada the priest commanded. And to
the captains over hundreds did the priest give king David 's spears and
shields, that were in the temple of the Lord. And he took the rulers over
hundreds, and the captains, and the guard, and all the people of the land, and
they brought down the king from the house of the Lord, and be sat on the
throne of the kings. And we read, 2 Kings i. 9, 11, 13. of three captains of
fifties, who, with their fifties, were sent successively by Ahaziah, king of
Israel, to bring the prophet Elijah to him. The Apocryphal writings tell us, 1
Mac. iii. 55. that Judas ordained captains over the people, even captains over
thousands, and over hundreds, and over fifties, and over tens.

These officers, from the captain of the host down to the lowest subaltern,
appear, after the monarchy took place, to have received their commissions from
the king. (Whereas they were before chosen by the people.) When Samuel declares
to the people the manner of the king that was to reign over them, this is part
of it; 1 Samuel viii. 12. he will appoint him captains over thousands, and
captains over fifties, etc. Accordingly when Saul began to grow jealous of
David's rising glory, 1 Samuel xviii. 13. he removed him from him, and made him
his captain over a thousand. So we read, 2 Samuel xviii. 1. that David numbered
the people that were with him, and set captains of thousands, and captains of
hundreds over them. 2 Chronicles. xxv. 5. and that Amaziah gathered Judah together,
and made them captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds.


in Israel, ready to my hand, which is so suitable to my present purpose, that
I should do injustice to the subject, if I neglected to give my readers some
extracts of it in the author's own words.

The military duties of watch and guard in cities, towns, etc. which by the
laws of K. William I. were ordered to be performed "in gyrum," i. e. in due
rotation of service by all the inhabitants, as I have already shown, were
farther regulated by the statute of Winchester, in the 13th K. Edw. I. A. D.
1285. which, without altering the former law about rotation, specifies the
strength of the guard to be set in each place, and ordains (for I will cite it
as abbreviated by Mr. Lambard in his "Duties of Constables," p. 13. which
proves that he thought it still in force so late as the reign of Q. Elizabeth
in 1584.) that NIGHT WATCHES should be kept yearly, from the feast of the
ASCENSION, until MICHAELMAS, by six men at every gate of every CITY, by 12
men in every BOROUGH town, and in every other TOWN by six men, or four men,
or according to the number of inhabitants in the town, all the night long,
from sun setting to sun rising: so that if any stranger did pass, he
should be arrested till the morning, and then set at large, (if no suspicion
were found of him,) but if any suspicion fell out against him, then he should be
imprisoned till he might be lawfully delivered. And of these WATCHES (says Mr.
Lambard) the officers before named have the charge within the limits (or
places) of their auctorities, as the CONSTABLE in his town, the BORSHOLDER in
his boroe, and the HIGH CONSTABLE within all his HUNDRED: and these officers
ought to see these WATCHES (says Mr. Lambard, by which he plainly insists on
the continued force of this statute, so that the enquiry concerning WATCH DUTY
at views of Frankpledge ought to be regulated by it) duly set and kept, and
ought also to cause HUE and CRY The hue and cry was a military exertion of
the civil power which all men were obliged to attend, with their arms in
military array, whenever legally summoned to do so. Even so late as the 3d Hen.
VII. 1. as Mr. Dalton in his Officium Vicecomitum relates, the sheriff's
bailiff, to execute a REPLEVY, took with him 300 men armed (MODO GUERRINO) sc.
with brigandines, jackes, and guns, and it was holden lawful; (says he,) for
the sheriff's officer has power to take assistance, as well as the sheriff
himself, p. 355. And a little farther he adds (p. 356.) and every man is sworn
(says Keble) to be aiding to the sheriff in his business; and if they do it
not at the request of the sheriff, they shall be fined, 3 Hen. VII. 1. Br. Fine
pur contempt 37. and trespass, 266. See also Stat. of 2 Hen. V. cap. 8. which
inflicteth both fine and imprisonment upon such as shall not aid the sheriff,
they being thereunto required. This proves that the military capacity of every
man is required to support the civil government.
to be raised after such as will not obey the ARREST of such watchmen. This
power of ARRESTING suspicious persons in all towns and boroughs; shows the
necessity of having in each town and borough a proper GOAL or appointed place
of confinement; especially as the common law required that if any man was of so
evil credit, that he could not get himself to be received into one of these
TYTHINGS or BOROES, that then he should be shut up in PRISON, as a man
unworthie to live at liberty amongst men abroad. (Lambard's Duties of
Constables, p. 8.) And the expenses necessary for the building and maintaining
such proper places of confinement might be levied by the COURT LEET on the
inhabitants of each district; for the LEET has competent power, according to
the common law, to levy taxes for defraying all necessary public works See
Powell's Treatise of the Antiquity, etc. of Courts of Leet, or View of
Frank-pledge, etc. p. 163. Any BY-LAWES for the commonweal may be made in a
LEET, and are good, and will lie against those that do not consent, as to make
cawseyes, highways, bridges, and such like And no public works surely are more
for the common weal, or more necessary for enforcing a due compliance with the
common law, than the erection of proper goals and places of confinement, or
houses of correction, and "of industry," in lesser districts, to prevent the
accumulation of multitudes of prisoners in the county goals, where they
mutually corrupt each other, and to prevent the baneful practice of selling
convicts into foreign slavery, or into miserable torture in floating prisons,
who, according to the common law, ought to be punished only upon the spot where
their offenses, as well as their contrition and amendment, might be known; for,
if there should be still cause to suspect a want of improvement in any of them,
so that they should not be able to obtain a readmission into any tithing of
Frankpledge; the LEETS had ample authority to prolong their imprisonment, and
to keep them hard at work, to defray the expenses of a sober and limited diet,
the very best mode of inclining reprobates to hear reason and instruction. The
indefatigable labors of the benevolent and truly patriotic Mr. HOWARD (who has
so disinterestedly devoted both himself and his fortune to the public service)
afford ample materials for selecting the most just and effectual means of
forming such necessary establishments.
, 44th Edward III. fol. 19. But a bylaw to repair a church binds none but such
as do assent, vid. Co. 5. fol. 63. ALEET may make BY-LAWES, the lord by
prescription may distreyne for the amerciaments, and sell the distress: For
the king may so do, and the LEET is the king's, although the lord has the
profits. BROOK LEET, 34. PRESCRIPTION 40. The same power, that is here
attributed to the lord of a leet, certainly belongs also to sheriffs, mayors,
bailiffs, and hundreders, or high constables, who may hold leets by the common
law, and consequently have a right also, by prescription, to distreyne for the
amerciaments, and to sell the distress. I must also observe that where any
lord of a manor has enjoyed a right of holding a court leet, and has either
abused or neglected his power, the king may certainly, according to the true
limited doctrine of "Nullum Tempus," (see my separate Tract on that head,)
resume the right of the court and all the profit of it, (which is, properly,
res fiscalis,) and must, in that case, restore the power of the holding the
said court to the high constable, or proper officer by the common law.
: so that the modern usage of applying to the great national council on such
occasions is clearly wrong; because it not only occasions a needless expense,
interferes with more important business of the nation, and grievously prolongs
the sittings of parliament, but also tends to enure the members to private
solicitations in behalf of partial objects; facilitates the practice of
canvassing them individually; and thereby lays them open to influence and
temptation in higher matters: whereas frequent but SHORT SESSIONS of newly
elected parliaments, like those of ancient times, would effectually cut up the
roots of corruption and undue influence.

In order the more effectually to promote the happy system of government, which
I now recommend, viz. that ALL freeborne men (within this kingdom) " should
cast themselves into TITHINGS," (see p. 16 and 17.) for the common security of
ALL, it was ordained by king William I. Ut OMNES habeant et teneant LEGEM REGIS
EDWARDI in omnibus rebus adauctis his quae constituimus (says the statute of
William) ad utilitatem Anglorum. That ALL PERSONS should have and hold THE LAW
of king Edward (wherein the more ancient laws for maintaining the tithings and
hundreds are collected and stated) in all things, those things being also added
which we have ordained (said William) "for the use of the English." And no free
nation could reasonably desire more substantial and effectual additions for the
security of their own peace and liberty than those additional laws of William,
most of which I have already cited That all cities, boroughs, castles,
hundreds, and wapentaches, of our whole kingdom, shall be watched and guarded
IN GIRUM (in rotation or by a roster of service) against malefactors and
enemies, according as the sheriffs, aldermen, mayors, (PRAEPOSITI, a title as
frequently given to the hundreders, or high-constables,) "and" (others) our
ministers, shall better provide by COMMON COUNCIL (i. e. by parliament) for the
good of the kingdom, that ALL earls, barons, knights, and sergeants,
(servientes,) and all freemen of our whole kingdom aforesaid, (universi liberi
homines totius regni nostri praedicti,) shall have and hold themselves always
well in ARMS and in horses, ut decet et oportet, (suitably to their rank,) and
that they may be always ready and prepared to fulfill our ENTIRE SERVICE
whenever there shall be occasion, and as they ought of right (de jure) to do
for their lands and tenements, and as we shall appoint them by COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE WHOLE KINGDOM (so that the English were so far from being enslaved by
what is commonly called the conquest, that K. Wm's statute expressly submits
the efficient power of the kingdom, the national militia, to the orders of
parliament). And also the clause which I have but just now cited for the
regulation of WATCH and WARD.
. To these I must now add a farther excellent clause of K. William's statute
Omnis hemo qui voluerit se teneri pro LIBERO, sit in PLEGIO, (i. e.
fidejussione,) ut PLEGIUS eum habeat ad justitiam si quid offenderit; et si
quisquam evaserit talium, videant plegii ut solvant quod calumniatum est, et
purgent se, quia in evaso nullam fraudem noverint. Requiratur HUNDREDUS, et
COMITATUS sicut antecessores statuerunt, et qui just venire debent et
noluerint, summoneantur semel, et, si secundo non venerint, accipiatur BOS
UNUS, at si tertio, alius BOS, et si quarto, reddatur de rebus hujus hominis
quod calumniatum est, quod dicitur ceapgyld, (al. orfgyld, quod idem est,) et
insuper regi forisfacitura.
, which is necessary for the better enforcing and promoting K. Edward's laws,
viz. that every man who shall be willing TO BE DEEMED A FREEMAN shall be IN
PLEDGE, (shall enter himself into some tithing of FRANKPLEDGE,) that the pledge
may have him to justice, if in any thing he should offend; and if any of such
(pledged persons) should abscond, that the pledges may pay whatsoever damages
are laid, (or rather are proved,) and may clear themselves, that they knew (or
were privy to) no fraud in the absconded person. Let the HUNDRED (court) "be
demanded" (or summoned) " and the COUNTY" (court) and those who ought of right
to attend (at either of these courts, as the context requires us to understand)
and shall be unwilling, let them be summoned ONCE; and, if to a SECOND
(summons) they shall not come, let ONE OX be taken, (or perhaps the medium
value of one ox, at the current market-price, for thus the quantum of the
forfeit would generally bear a due proportion, or nearly so, to the true value
of money; as college-rents are sometimes ascertained by the value of certain
quantities of corn,) and, if to a THIRD (summons he shall not come, let)
"another ox" (be taken,) and, if to a FOURTH (summons they shall not come,) let
what is rated be paid out of the effects of this man, which is called CEAPGYLD
CEAPGYLD. CEAP in the Saxon tongue signifies price, wages, cattle, wealth, or
chattles; and GYLD signifies payment; the compound word CEAPGYLD, according to
Mr. Somner, signifies rei furto ablatae pretium, "the price of any thing
stolen," but which, in this law, must evidently mean the payment, or forfeit of
the man's reputed wealth; and
, or ORFGYLD so likewise ORFGYLD. ORFE signifies money, cattle, effects; and
the compound word Mr. Somner renders "rei pretium," the price of any thing. So
that I suppose both these words to be synonymous with the Saxon word
. Regular summonses, however, were required by law, to be made seven days
before any of these courts, unless a legal and admissable excuse could be
assigned for the omission, ( et septem diebus antea SUMMONIRI, nisi publicum
commodum vel dominica regis necessitas terminum praeveniat, see K. Edward's law
de Heretochiis, etc.) And a neglect or disregard of a legal summons to a court
of law might surely be deemed a contempt of the law, the declared penalties for
which (a single or double forfeiture of the man's WERE Were; which is commonly
rendered Aestimati^ capitis;" not the whole value of a man's estimated wealth,
but only such a certain rate according to each man's rank in life, as he might
justly be supposed able to pay (in case he should incur a penalty or forfeit)
without being ruined and degraded by it, agreeable to what I have remarked in
p. 86 and 87, on the due limitation of amerciaments, by the 14th chapter of
Magna Charta; which was certainly the law of the kingdom long before that time.
Because, even in K. Edward's laws, it appears, that a man might be amerced
twice his Were, "his Weram suam," for a second offense, and all that he was
worth for a third offense; so that a man's Were, or estimated price, was
certainly very far within the compass of his real wealth or substance. And,
therefore, all these amerciaments must necessarily be understood to have been
levied strictly according to the spirit of what was afterward ordained in
Magna Charta, i. e. saving to a man (according to his rank) his CONTENEMENT, or
MERCHANDISE, or wainage, without degrading him from his rank and means of
livelihood, except the same crime was obstinately repeated: and such
amerciaments were to be made only by the oath of honest and lawful men of the
vicinage, according to the regular usage of all the ancient leets and popular
courts. The great object of amerciaments was to compel men of all ranks to
respect and observe the laws; whence arose the necessity of varying the quantum
of the mulct in due proportion to the offender's ability to pay, without
actually depressing or degrading him from his rank; and of this due proportion
a jury of the vicinage were the only proper judges.
) may perhaps help to explain the nature of the amerciaments mentioned above
for neglect of summonses. Et qui leges apostabit, (i. e. violarit,) si fuerit
Anglicus, vel Dacus, vel Waliscus, vel Albanicus, vel insulicola, WERAE suae
reus sit apud regem; et, si SECUNDO id faciat, reddat BIS WERAM SUAM; et, si
quid addat TERTIO, reus sit omnium quae habebit. And whosoever shall neglect
(or violate) the laws, whether he be Englishman, Dane, Welchman, or Scot, or
islander, shall forfeit his WERE with the king; and, if he shall do it a SECOND
TIME, let him pay TWICE HIS WERE; and, if he shall add a THIRD TIME, (i. e. a
third repetition of the same offense,) let him forfeit all that he shall have.


To increase amerciaments on the repetition of offenses seems to be both just
and necessary; but, whether in so enlarged a proportion as that of doubling the
Were for a second conviction, and forfeiting all on a third, may reasonably be
questioned; especially as there is no express exception for second and third
offenses in the limitation of americaments ordained by the 14th chapter of
magna charta. Nevertheless, if we consider that a frequent repetition of the
same misdemeanor is undoubtedly a heinous aggravation of it, and that it was
always so considered in the common law, and punished accordingly by an
aggravation of the mulct, as appears by the laws already cited, we shall,
perhaps, be inclined to believe, that the authors of the said limitation of
mulcts in Magna Charta, though they certainly intended to regulate by it the
pecuniary penalties of crimes in general, yet, (for any thing that appears,)
they had not in contemplation the peculiar circumstance of a contemptuous
repetition of any crime, and may therefore be justly supposed not to have
intended to abridge the salutary spirit of the common law, so necessary for its
own preservation, in duly punishing, by gradual advances of severity, any
repeated contempts of its authority.

If all these points be duly considered, it must appear that our common law is
already vested with ample powers to enforce a revival of the ancient
constitution of this kingdom; so that nothing is wanting but a general
communication of its principles (the purpose of this tract) to engage THE WILL
OF THE PUBLIC for its re-assumption; that the SUMMA ET MAXIMA SECURITAS of our
ancestors (see p. 6.) may be once more established, the happy effects of which
cannot be expressed in stronger terms than in the words of Sir Edw. Coke on
this very subject. By the due execution of this law, (says he, speaking of the
VIEW of FRANKPLEDGE, in his comment on Magna Charta, p. 73. 2d inst.) such
peace (whereof this chapter speaks) was universally holden within this
realm, as no injuries, homicides, robberies, thefts, riots, tumults, or other
offenses, were committed; so as a man with a white wand might safely have
ridden, before the conquest, with much money about him, without any weapon
throughout England; and one says truly, Referring to Mr. Lambard's explanation
of AesTIMATIO CAPITIS.
conjectur a est, eaque non levis, haud it a multis scatuisse prisca tempora
sceleribus, quippe quibus rapinae, furto, coedi Caedi, or manslaughters, (if he
meant voluntary slaughters or murders,) ought not to have been mentioned here
as crimes formerly punished only by pecuniary mulcts; for, though I am well
aware that many eminent law-writers have supposed this, as well as the learned
Mr. Lambard and the excellent lawyer who quoted him, and though, perhaps, too
many instances may be cited of such a corrupt usage sometimes prevailing in
ancient times, so as to strengthen the supposition, yet it never was the law
since the establishment of christianity, but a real perversion of the law,
whenever it was done; which must have been occasioned either by corrupt
partiality, or favor, from the officers of the crown, or through their
ignorance, and want of due discrimination to be aware of the particular
circumstances of manslaughters, wherein fines, or mulcts, might sometimes
legally take place, as in involuntary manslaughters, to make men more careful
of each others lives, and even in cases of accidental deaths, wherein the
deodands were in the nature of mulcts, and also the particular circumstances
when mulcts might be levied for actual murder; which was only when the murderer
had fled and could not be taken, that a certain sum should be paid for him, and
should be collected, because they had not taken the killer, etc. "Si autem
aufugeret," (i. e. interfector,) et capi non posset, s^lverentur pro co 66
marcae, et colligebantur in villa ubi quis esset interfectus, et ideo quia
interfectorem non habuerunt; et, si in tali villa pro paupertate colligi non
possent, colligerentur in hundredo in thesauro regis deponendae. (Bract. lib.
3. c. 15.) N.B. The fines were to be deposited in the exchequer ( deponendae,
and not appropriated) for a year and a day, lest the murderers should, in the
mean time, be taken; in which case the fines were to be returned to the town or
hundred, as will hereafter be shown.
But, if he could be taken, the same law declared "fieret de eo justitia," let
justice be done upon him; and the only justice, in the laws of GOD and man for
such a crime was, and is, the retribution of death! The learned judge Bracton
copied from K. Edward's laws, this very expression, concerning a convicted
murderer, "sieret de eo justitia," as also the alternative when the murderer
could not be taken, si autem aufugeret, SOLVERETUR ut supra dictum est, (see
leges Edouardi regis, c. 16.). The doctrine, here referred to by the words "ut
supra dictum est," is in the preceding chapter of king Edward's laws, viz. No.
15. entitled, Lex Murdrorum, to the following effect; Si quispiam murdratus
alicubi reperiebatur, querebatur apud villam ubi inveniebatur interfector
illius. Qui, si inveniri poterat, tradebatur justitiae regis infra ipsos 8 dies
interfectionis. Si vero inveniri non peterat, mensis et unius diei respectum
habebant ad eum perquirendum. Quod si intra terminum non inveniebatur,
colligebantur in villa illa 46 Marcae. Quod si ad tantae solutionem pecuniae
non sufficiebat, per hundredum colligebatur, quod in villa non poterat.
Veruntamen quoniam omnino villa confundebatur, providerunt barons quod per
hundredum colligerentur, et sigillo al^cujus Baronis comitatus sigillarentur,
et ad Thesaurarium Regis deportarentur, quas sigillatus (perhaps for
sigillatas) ipse servaret per annum et diem unum, quod si infra hunc terminum
possit murdrator haberi, traderetur justitiae regis, et ipsi marcas Thesaurario
Regis commenda^as rehaberent. (So that the fine appears manifestly to be
intended for no other purpose than to induce the inhabitants to bring the
murderer to justice.) Sin infra tempus annuum non posset teneri, parents
murdrati sex marcas haberent, rex quadraginta: etc. etc.
that if a murdered person was any where found, enquiry was made after the
murderer, who, if he could be found within eight days, he was to be delivered
to the justice of the king. But, if he could not be found, the inhabitants had
a respite (respectus) of a month and a day, to search for him. Within which
term if he was not found, the 46 marks beforementioned were to be collected in
the town, or (if so large a sum could not there be raised) throughout the
hundred; and to be delivered, sealed up, to the king's treasurer, who was to
keep them, sealed up, for a year and a day, that if, within this term, the
murderer could be taken, he should be DELIVERED TO THE JUSTICE OF THE KING, and
the marks were to be returned. So that justice, and not the fine, was
manifestly the object; for, otherwise, some farther provision would have been
made, that the fine should not be returned to the innocent inhabitants, until
the abilities of the guilty person to make it good were ascertained. And,
besides, the justice of the king could not legally be deferred, because the law
ordained that "justice should be done" upon the murderer, "fieret de eo
justitia," and there could be no other justice to expiate the crime of murder
except the blood of the criminal, after the laws of God were acknowledged by
our Anglo Saxon ancestors; so that the king could not remit the due punishment
either for a fine, or through favor, without drawing upon his own head a share
of the guilt of blood! And, as a proof of this, the crime of wilful killing, or
murder, was, in the laws of K. Canute, deemed ^OTELESS, that is, UNE^^IABLE,
which is amply demonstrated by the learned Mr. justice Aland, in the preface to
his edit* of Fortescue's Treatise on the difference between an absolute and
limited Monarchy, p. 59. to 64. See also my Tract on Crown Law, etc.
, plurimisque aliis sceleribus mulctae imponebantur pecuniariae, cum hiis hac
nostra tempestate, (as for instance, 15 men hanged up together upon one gallows
at Newgate the very last execution-day!!!) nos omnibus merito capitis poenam
irrogamus, etc. 2d Inst. p. 73.

Mos retinendus est fidelissimae vetustatis. 4 co. 78.

Old Jewry, July 17, 1784. GRANVILLE SHARP.

(...),
(...),
(...).
Glory in the highest to GOD,
And on Earth PEACE,
Toward Men GOODWILL!

TRACT, Number II.
An ABSTRACT from the preceding Account of the Hundreds and Tithings, presented
by the author to the committee of delegates from the several counties, etc. and
entitled A PROPOSAL For removing the enormous disproportion of popular
representation enjoyed by the corrupt and venal boroughs: which Boroughs are
now vested or monopolized, in the hands of a few individuals, as private
property; a property avowedly estimated by the value of the seats in
parliament, (instead of the only lawful property therein, the real rentals of
the tenements,) and, at that unlawful and exorbitant estimation, notoriously
bought and sold, to the disgrace and perversion of parliamentary authority.
THE present great national evil, the notorious misrepresentation of the
commons in parliament, cannot safely be remedied or altered for the purpose of
amendment, by any other mode than that of reverting back to the first
principles of the constitution, and by reviving the ancient rights of all
denominations or classes of the people; at the same time carefully rejecting
every innovation that is not consistent in principle with the ancient usages of
the realm, of which the certain effects are already known: whereas no human
prudence can insure the real tendency and final effect of an innovation in
matters of state, howsoever plausible it may at first appear.

Though all true friends to the cause of liberty and the natural rights of
mankind would wish that every man should vote for his representative in the
national council, without any other description of right, or qualification,
than that of being a man; yet, if this has not already been the usage of the
realm, it is not, perhaps, advisable, at least at present, to be adopted. --
We know not what would be the effects of it; probably they would be good: but
we ought to walk in a trodden path, and build on sure foundations.

That every man, as such, if he was but an inhabitant of a county, did formerly
vote in the court of that county (called the plein county, or full county) at
elections for the knights of the shire, seems probable, by the description of
very great outrageous and excessive number of people dwelling within the same
counties, etc. voting at such elections, as mentioned in the act of 8 Hen. VI.
cap. 14. which restrained the right of voting for knights to the freeholders of
40s. per ann. lands or tenements.

But a just definition of terms will best show what description of persons have
an unquestionable right to vote for representatives according to the
fundamental principles of the constitution.

The titles of freeholder and liber-tenens are ambiguous terms, not
sufficiently descriptive of the rank intended to be expressed; for they are
applied at present only to land-owners; that is, to those who have, at least, a
life-interest in lands or houses; which last, as being built on land, do
equally entitle the proprietor to the rank of a land-owner: but these ambiguous
terms, freeholders and liberi tenentes, have sometimes been applied also to the
free-renters of tenements by the year in contradistinction to the tenants at
will and holders in villenage; for the old Saxon freo-borges, or
free-burgesses, (that is, the free pledges of the realm,) were equally free in
their condition with those persons we now call freeholders, though the tenure
of many of them was not permanent; they being, (by far the greatest part of
them) only the renters of tenements by the year; though, indeed, the
land-owners themselves (those that were housekeepers, or householders) must
have been included under the same general description of freoborges.

Sir Edward Coke defines the meaning of the word burgh to be because it sends
burgesses to parliament; and, though this is not the proper derivation of the
word, it is certainly the ancient usage of all boroughs, as well as the right
of all burgesses, or freoborges. For burghs were originally named from
burgesses, or freo-borges, i. e. free-pledges "It was in former times" (says
Sir Edward Coke, speaking of the word BURGH) taken for those companies of ten
families which were one another's pledge, and therefore a pledge, in the Saxon
tongue a BORHOE, whereof (some take it) that a BURGH came; etc. whereof also
comes HEADBOROUGH, or BORROWHEAD, capitalis plegius, a CHIEF PLEDGE, viz. the
chief man of the BORHOE, etc. Co. Lit. p. 109.
, in their collective capacity, in tithings and hundreds (many of which might
be included in one borough) and not vice versa, the burgesses from the burghs,
which at present is commonly understood; and may, indeed, in some cases of the
more modern boroughs, incorporated by charters, be really the fact A different
etymology may also be assigned to many towns, the names of which end with berg
or burg, which signifies a fortification, or castle, from the Greek (...), of
which the learned Sheringham has given some instances in his tract de Anglorum
Gentis origin, p. 278.
.

In the great annual courts of Frankpledge throughout the kingdom, every
housekeeper was incorporated with nine other neighboring housekeepers,
(archbishops, bishops, peers, and other great men, excepted, who pledged their
own households, and were supposed in law to have a tithing within their own
families; but all other householders, or renters of houses, per annum, were
incorporated) in distinct legal associations called tithings, or decenaries,
from the incorporated number of housekeepers in each: and though all youths of
12 or 14 years of age, as also lodgers, journeymen, and male servants, were
likewise obliged to attend the great annual court of frankpledge, and be there
sworn to the king's peace, and be also regularly included in the decenary and
trained in the use of arms, together with the ten housekeepers in whose
families they were respectively included and numbered, yet the ten housekeepers
only were properly freo-borges, because they were the responsible persons, who
pledged all the rest, and had a fixed habitation, and certain interest in the
state, paying scot and lot, being liable to all national, as well as county and
parish, rates.

And these ten Freeborgs of each tithing were still farther distinguished by
the title of deciners, (i. e. decenarii,) a term very properly expressive of
their rank and quality as fixed and permanent members of a decenary, consisting
of ten such associated members, one of which was annually elected chief of the
ten, or tithingman.

The term deciner has been very much mistaken and misrepresented by law
writers; some applying it merely to the headborough, or capitalis-friborgus,
the tithingman, or head of each ten free-burgesses; and others again to every
man that was included in a tithing; which is a gross abuse of the term: for a
tithing may consist of many more than ten, (even 20 or 30 males,) yet the ten
housekeepers who are principally responsible and thereby actually constitute
the decenary, both in number and title, those ten alone are properly the
deciners of a tithing.

Again, the word denizen has strangely puzzled the etymologists; who have
sought its derivation, some from the French tongue, others again from the
ancient British, but both equally in vain: For, though it appears, that the
Britons had the term denizen in use amongst them before the coming in of the
Anglo-Saxons, yet, as all the Roman colonies, established among the Britons,
were not only divided into centuriae or hundreds, but had also their
decuriones, and consequently decenaries also, (for the captain of the ten could
not be without the nine whom he headed,) both in their civil and military
government, it is clear, that the term denizen is of pure Latin original, from
the numeral adjective deni, forming the Latin verb denizo, to express the
adoption of any person into all the franchises and rights of a decenary. And
our law-writers have regularly used the participle denizatus, and the
derivative substantive denizatio, to express the introduction of aliens to the
franchises of natural-born subjects, and yet they have not perceived the
obvious meaning of these words both in sense and sound.

For the alien is admitted by denization to all the rights of mutual protection
enjoyed by the community of natives in their established decenaries; and if he
then becomes a housekeeper, and one of the ten housekeepers, who jointly
constitute a tithing, or decinary, he is, of course, a deciner; and, with other
deciners, is an incorporated member of the county which he inhabits; for, as
the hundreds are the constituent parts of the county, and the tithings the
constituent parts of each hundred, it necessarily follows, that the deciners
are suitors of the county-courts; which right at present is very improperly
attributed to the freeholders, or (more properly) to the land-owners alone; for
the right of the deciners, or free burgesses, to the county-courts is
demonstrated by the examples which have been given of general elections for
knights, citizens, and burgesses, all together promiscuously in the
county-courts; which I have recommended in a former tract See Equitable
Representation necessary to the Establishment of Law, Peace, and good
government, etc. p. 22-29.
, as one means of reducing the enormous disproportion of representation (at
present enjoyed by some particular boroughs, to the effectual disfranchisement
of all the rest!) whereby the kingdom has lost the means of expressing the
sense of the people in parliament; and the king has been deluded by majorities
of alternate factions; factions, which, falsely calling themselves the commons
of England, have plunged the nation into desperate measures and enormous
expenses, and thereby loaded it with a burden, which it cannot possibly bear
and retrieve without a speedy reformation.

Though the representatives of cities are now called citizens, yet it appears
that all cities and large towns have their right of voting as being ancient
boroughs; that is, they had their right of voting from the inhabitants being
freo-borges, or free-pledges of each other, in their respective decenaries, as
deciners; and their right of becoming deciners arose from their being
householders, paying certain rent per annum; or paying each of them yearly an
annual rent: for that is the true definition of burgage-tenure, as described by
Littleton; and therefore, not only householders whose houses are their own
property, but also EVERY RENTER OF A HOUSE, OR TENEMENT, who is equally liable
to bear the burdens of the state, by being rated to all public and parochial
taxes, OUGHT TO BE ADMITTED TO VOTE FOR THEIR REPRESENTATIVES IN PARLIAMENT; a
right which they anciently enjoyed. For of such OLD towns, called BOROUGHS,
(says Littleton, p. 109. b.) come the BURGESSES of the parliament, when the
king has summoned his parliament.

The ancient city of Westminster, and many other cities For the towns, that now
be cities or counties, in old time were boroughes, and called boroughes, for of
such old towns, called boroughs, come the burgesses of the parliament, etc.
Lit. p. 109. b.
, as well as the ancient borough of Southwark, still retain the original usage
and rights of burgage-tenure, the mere renters of houses, or householders,
throughout all the parishes respectively included in each, being still entitled
to vote by ancient prescription, which clearly proves the original nature of
burgage-tenure, though it is very much altered in some other places, partly
through the encroachments of purchasers of boroughs, to reduce the number of
voters; and partly by granting exclusive privileges to a few people in the
incorporated chartered boroughs.

The shortest and most easy mode of restoring, to all the householders of this
realm, their ancient right of voting, is, first, to restore their ancient
capacity of DECINERS, by advising them to throw themselves into tithings or
decenaries; and to hold annual courts of Frankpledge (now too long neglected)
for the renewal and continual preservation of the tithing associations.

By this means both the civil and military government of the people will be
completely restored, and peace and defense will be completely secured, so that
housebreaking and robbery will no longer be known amongst us, for such was once
the happy state of the kingdom; and effected by the very same regulations here
recommended. A farther advantage, by restoring this ancient, legal, and
constitutional, mode of government, will be, that the exact proportions of the
people in each county, who have a right to vote, will be truly ascertained;
whereby may hereafter be introduced a representation of all the counties,
perfectly equal, in proportion to their respective numbers of householders: for
if, in each county, divisions were formed, consisting each of 200 decenaries or
tithings, (including 2000 householders each,) that proportion will be found, on
calculation, to contain the most convenient and proper number to be joined in
the election of one deputy for parliament, in order to obtain an equal
representation of all the families in the kingdom; and no persons will be
excluded but servants and others, who have no fixed habitation of their own;
and, consequently, at present, have no permanent interest in the state; or, at
least, do not bear so large a proportion of relief to its burdens as the
housekeepers do.

Two thousand families might well afford to pay ample wages to one
representative; and the stipend might be very easily collected, if the
decenaries were duly formed and established, and the several courts which
regularly arise from the decenaries, viz. the hundred courts; and those which
might most conveniently be added to superintend and regulate the hundred
courts, viz. the court of one thousand families, (answering to those of the
Israelitish commonwealth, the thousands of Ephraim, the thousands of Judah,)
and lastly the junction of TWO such courts of the thousand, for the election of
ONE representative. This last proposed court of 2000 householders would
probably be equal to what some of the old trithing courts formerly were; which
are said to have sometimes included the third or fourth part of a county.

If every division of 2000 families were to elect one deputy to represent them
in the great common council of the kingdom, the whole number of
representatives, for South Britain, would amount (according to the present
state of population) to about 476 This calculation is formed from the account
of the number of houses charged, chargeable, and excused, in 1777, viz. 952,
734. See Dr. Price's Observations on the Population of England and Wales, p.
11. In my former proposal, from which this is extracted, where I make the
number of representatives amount to 500, I have, for the sake of a round
number, followed Dr. Price's advice, when he says, concerning the number of
houses, in p. 14. let it, however, he stated (says he) at a million.
; by which there would be a profitable reduction of 37 members.

This would be no innovation, because the election would still be vested where
it ought, viz. in all the free householders, or free-borges, of all the
counties; and that in the most perfect proportion of equality: and this order
of equity would not be liable to change, or to be corrupted, because the number
of deputies or delegates would rise or fall in due proportion with the degree
of population in each county, from time to time.

GRANVILLE SHARP.

TRACT, Number III.
Being a Memorandum on a late Proposal for a New Settlement to be made on the
Coast of AFRICA; recommending, to the Author of that Proposal, several
Alterations in his Plan, and more especially the adoption of the ancient Mode
of Government by Tithings (or Decenaries) and Hundreds as being the most useful
and effectual Mode of Government for all Nations and Countries.
THE proposal for a settlement on the coast of Africa will deserve all
encouragement, if the settlers are absolutely prohibited from holding any kind
of property in the persons of men, as slaves, and from selling either man,
woman, or child. Even to claim any human person, as a slave, ought to be
considered as an affront to the whole community, and be punished accordingly.

With respect to the proposal for leave to purchase slaves, the permission, if
granted at all, must be very carefully guarded; and the price given must be
considered and declared, at the time of purchase, to be a mere pecuniary debt
for redemption, due from the person purchased to the society or state of the
settlement; and by no means to be tranferred to any single individual, (which
would introduce domestic tyranny and traffic in the bodies of men,) but the
debt to be discharged at leisure, without increase or interest, whenever the
redeemed, or his friends, shall tender the amount of the first price; in
default of which, the price should be worked out by a limited proportional
service to the state; and the state should hold forth, at the same time, ample
encouragement to engage compliance and submission: but it should be an
established principle, that the state or society ought rather to lose the value
of the purchase than, by compulsion, to enforce involuntary servitude, whereby
honest labor, that should always be deemed honorable, is rendered odious and
slavish.

Rules must also be laid down to prevent the monopoly of land within the bounds
of the settlement: and a sufficient reserve of land must be made for public
services (schools and religious instruction) in each township; and for cottage
land to be distributed in small parcels to new settlers and redeemed captives;
which parcels must revert to the state or community, for the same benevolent
investiture to others of the like condition, as soon as the temporary
possessors are enabled to purchase larger lots; for it will prevent, in some
degree, the monopoly of land, if the cottage-lots are untenable with other
land. Common land should also be reserved for a competent distance round each
town and village, wherein all inhabitants, rich and poor, should have an equal
personal right: because the claims of rich landholders, when made in proportion
to the size of their bordering estates, is unreasonable and unjust; and has
occasioned a cruel perversion of the utility of common lands in England: for
the live stocks of rich farmers, occasionally turned loose upon the commons,
generally deprived the cattle of the poor inhabitants of their necessary
sustenance; and the late divisions for enclosures, by act of parliament, having
been, for the most part, inconsiderately granted in the same unjust
proportions, have at length nearly annihilated the common lands of England:
whereas, on the contrary, the large possessions of the neighboring landholders
ought, in reason and natural justice, rather to have excluded them from the
least share in the inheritance of the poor inhabitants; or, at most; their
share should have been merely personal, as men, and individuals, equal to, but
not exceeding, the claims of their neighbors, that the common lands might be
truly in common.

The managers, entrusted with the society's property to form the settlement,
should have no settled dominion or authority over the people as governors or
judges, but should be contented with that superiority and influence, which
their pecuniary trust, as agents and overseers for the society, will naturally
afford them; and their services may be amply rewarded and encouraged after the
first year's salary, by an admission to a due proportion or share with the
members of the society in the general profits of the settlement, and in the
profits of the common or public trade of the society; but no private trade
whatsoever should be permitted to any of the society's managers and agents.

The officers for internal government, as the governor or mayor, the sheriffs
and other magistrates, constables, etc. etc. should be freely elected every
year by all the inhabitants, due qualifications being premised to render men
eligible to offices of dignity and trust.

The purposes of the defense, legislation, public justice, government, and
subordination, of the settlers, and their union as a community, (however large
and extensive the settlements may hereafter become,) are points more easily to
be accomplished than is generally conceived; provided the ancient Anglo-Saxon
government by mutual frankpledge in tithings (ordecenaries) and hundreds A
short, yet very comprehensive and well-stated account of this ancient mode of
government was published in the year 1780, on the spur of an occasion which too
clearly demonstrated the lamentable want of this excellent institution: I mean
the dangerous riots in that year, which could not have proceeded to such an
alarming excess, had not this institution been long disused, for otherwise "the
civil power," as the sensible author remarks, would have fully guarded us from
its outrages, p. 45. "I ascribe" (says he, in letter II. p. 27.) the complete
formation of those general outlines, by which we have ever defined the English
constitution, to Alfred, on the authority of historians, who specify the
particular regulations which rendered his government so happy as well as
glorious; which have been, in some degree, preserved amidst violent and
numerous revolutions; to which every Englishman has an unconquerable
partiality; and the restoration of which, to their proper vigor and effect,
would secure our persons and property, and preserve that peace and order which
are so essential to the happiness of the community.

Keeping in view those general, those beautiful, outlines which were formed by
the institutions of our early ancestors; over which the people sighed when
broken and deformed by the Norman conquest, by the bloody contests of the
houses of Lancaster and York, by the tyranny of the house of Tudor, and the
folly of that of Stuart; and an attention to which, alone, rendered the
revolution a blessing: we must define an English citizen to be a freeman; who
is to owe his protection, and the security of his family and property, to a
civil government, of which he is an essential member.

You will observe, Sir, that I confine myself to one object, or one part of our
constitution, which provided for the safety of individuals, and the
preservation of order by the following regulations, still existing in names and
forms; the revival of which would be the most beneficial and popular act of
government which can well be imagined.

The whole kingdom was, as it is now, divided into COUNTIES, HUNDREDS, and
TITHINGS. Ten families were associated, their names entered, their occupations
defined: the males in them from eighteen to fifty, or sixty, years of age,
pledged themselves for the security of the tithing; and to obey the summons of
the decennary, or tithingman, on the least apprehension of danger. They were
furnished with such arms as the times afforded.

The perfect knowledge which every neighborhood had of its inhabitants; the
concern which every man had in the security of every man; and the obligation
which every decennary was under to be answerable for his tithing; either
prevented all violations of peace and order, or corrected them at their first
origin.

All the decennaries or tithingmen were chosen by the people once a year; and
this is an essential circumstance in the institution.

The ten tithingmen of every district, called a hundred because it contained a
hundred families, chose a person to preside over the hundred, to whom they made
their appeals, and who had a power of calling them out. All these were amenable
to the earl or count who governed the county; and he was amenable to the king,
who either by the earl or by the sheriff, both of which were of his own
appointment The worthy author in this point is mistaken: the sheriff, as well
as the earl and heretock, were, in ancient times, chosen by the people.
, could call out the whole force of a county, or of any number of counties, as
the public exigencies required; while the internal peace and order of each
district was provided for without his interference, and in a manner perfectly
consistent with his general authority and influence.

Nothing has ever been imagined more simple in its construction, or more
effectual in the execution, than this part of the English constitution. The
several powers of it, which in most cases are in eternal discord, are here so
happily blended, that the people are secure and free; the king's power extends
to every thing but mischief, and is, in reality, greater than can be obtained
on any other plan.

These regulations might be easily restored and rendered as effectual as ever.
The prepossessions of the people are strongly in their favor; and, perhaps, no
others can be contrived which will not set the body of the people at enmity
with government; which will perfectly allay their apprehensions and jealousies;
will make them the ministers of their own security, while the power of the king
reaches every individual of them, by a chain, every link of which is effectual,
and will not interfere with the prerogative of the king in other departments of
the state, however the business of them may be administered. * * * *

"If you mean that it is impracticable," (says he, in letter III.) because the
inhabitants of this country are too far advanced in luxury, too indolent, too
effeminate, to enter on any plan of security, which will require the least
trouble, or put them to the least inconvenience; and if you can ascertain this
fact, I have no answer to make. But the trouble and inconvenience are such as
would not be complained of by women. What is it but an amusement to learn the
common use of arms? What inconvenience to submit to such regulations as may
bring together a neighborhood, a parish, the ward of a city, a town, a
district, etc. to clear them of vagabonds, occasionally to assist the civil
magistrate, and to lay the basis of a general security, confidence, and
strength, where it ought to be laid, in the whole body of the people?

I will venture to affirm, that there is no other method by which disturbances,
riots, and insurrections, can be prevented, without debasing the people into
the condition of brutes: and there is no other method by which a king may hold
every man in the nation in his hands; while every man in the nation would feel
and know himself to be as free as it is possible he should be in society.

Hints have been thrown out of acts of parliament which render such
associations, as I recommend, illegal; but the acts are not specified. I know
there are laws forbidding a man's going armed, in a time of tranquillity and
peace, without leave from a magistrate, and specifying such assemblies of
people as are dangerous and seditious; but without the most distant reference
to the right which every man has, from nature, from the connivance of the most
despotic governments, and from the express provisions of the English
constitution, to provide for his own defense and that of his family; and to
unite with his neighborhood, under the eye and direction of the supreme
magistrate, for the general peace and order of the community.

If there were such laws as you mention, they could not possibly have effect,
against not only a necessary right or nature, but an essential principle of the
English constitution. If a law were made, that, because it is possible an
English elector may become venal, therefore all electors must relinquish the
right of voting, -- would this constitute an obligation? Will any man say, that
the legislature is competent to the making of such a law? -- how much less to
annihilate the first and most important principles of human society, by
awarding, that, as it is possible men may make an improper use of their limbs,
or their arms, which may be as necessary as their limbs, they must therefore
suffer them to be taken off.

The power of the legislature, like every power in human society, is limited by
certain and accurate bounds; it may exceed these bounds, and commit
absurdities, and even offenses. The English legislature is just as competent to
make a law, by which every Englishman may be banished to the Orkneys, or put to
death, as it is to enjoin the people to give up the right of self-defence and
preservation, by the use of their limbs, or by the use of arms.

The apprehension that associations will produce commotions and riots, instead
of preventing them, must be pretended only. And all the arguments for depriving
the people of the right of associating, because they have often assembled for
mischievous purposes, are delusive. Cardinal de Retz says, that all numerous
assemblies are mobs; and I will add, that all mobs are mischievous. Let the
people, who might form such assemblies, be divided into small bodies; and,
though the individuals be not improved, they will act reasonably and well. The
design of associations is, to prevent large and tumultuous assemblies; to
arrange the people under the eye of government, as accurately as an army,
without diminishing their constitutional independence and liberty; to increase
the difficulty of misleading them, and to destroy all ideas of appeals to them.

Here I beg to be understood, not as aiming at any of the rights of the people:
but the idea of an appeal to them has been borrowed from the government of
Rome; in England it is, like the introduction of military force, a thing that
negligence or mismanagement may render necessary; but the constitution is
perfect without it; no supposition is made of the possibility of having any
occasion to make it; and, whenever it is made, the remedy may be as hazardous
as any evil it can be designed to remove. A whole nation, like the human body,
in order to act with harmony and pleasure, must be divided into small parts,
each having its local power, subject to the direction and control of the
general will, p. 38 to 44.


be duly adopted; and this being already consistent with the common law and
ancient constitution of this kingdom, (still deemed legal though not in use,)
might be lawfully established, even if the settlement is made within the
boundaries of the present English claims; but, in that case, the legal process
in all the courts of justice must be carried on in the king's name; and the
settlers may not refuse to admit a governor, or lieutenant, of the king's
appointment, with a limited delegation of authority, according to the
constitution of England, whenever the privy council shall think proper to send
one.

But, if the settlement be attempted in any other part of Africa, not claimed
by European powers, the managers must first obtain the consent (and
association, if possible) of the native inhabitants, or else the establishment
must be made on an uninhabited part of the coast: and, as the majority of the
settlers will probably be negroes, returned from slavery and oppression to
their native soil, there will be no necessity to form the plan of government
strictly by the constitutional model of England, any farther than reason and
experience may suggest the adoption of some particular parts of it: but we may,
in that case, assume the liberty of drawing a precedent for government from
more ancient and more perfect documents than our Saxon records, viz. from the
example, or rather the original intention, of the Israelitish commonwealth,
purified and improved by the general precepts and maxims of the gospel, and by
the example of free congregational government amongst the primitive Christians,
who decided their own temporal litigations and differences, ((...), "things
pertaining to this life," 1 Cor. vi. 1 -- 8.) as well as ecclesiastical
questions, in their regular assemblies of all the people: which method was an
ancient ethnic custom, (derived probably from patriarchal times,) as appears by
the example of the pagan Ephesians, recorded in Acts xix. 38, 39. whom their
town clerk referred to a lawful assembly ((...), apparently distinct, as the
context proves, from their ordinary courts of justice, then subject to the
Romans) for the examination and resolution of all extraordinary questions.

The Israelitish government, under the theocracy, was administered by
freely-elected judges and officers (see my tract on the Law of Nature, p. 325
to 329.) throughout all the tribes and cities or gates; except in the
extraordinary cases of prophetical judges; though these were probably elected
likewise, as soon as their superior, or supernatural, abilities became
generally known.

They had a regular gradation of official power, heads of tens, of fifties, of
hundreds, and of thousands; besides the provincial governors, who were ancient
heads of houses or tribes: these altogether formed one great band of
allegiance, uniting the whole community together for action and defense, as one
man, with one mind, viz. by the free resolutions of the majority; the smaller
divisions being regularly included and controuled in the larger, and the
individuals of all the divisions being mutually bound to each other by the
reciprocal ties, or allegiance, of frankpledge, which our Saxon ancestors, and
many other, even savage and heathen, nations The Romans had their decuriones
and centuriones, not only in their military, but also in their civil,
government; and, consequently, they must have had the popular divisions of
tithings and hundreds much in the same manner as those established by K Alfred
in England, in imitation of the Israelitish commonwealth; and even the Chinese
and Japonese (it is said) have tithings to this day.
, have in some degree maintained, probably from the patriarchal times. For, all
men (having the knowledge of good and evil) are capable of this form of
government, if it is once properly explained to them, and established: and
there is no mode of defending, restraining, and keeping in order, a promiscuous
body of men, so cheap, so easy, or so certainly effectual for every profitable
purpose, as that of mutual government by the principles and maxims of right, in
such equal proportioned congregations; each of which is a constituent part, or
member, of a more powerful congregation, in the great unity, or commonwealth;
wherein every individual, however violent or morose in himself, is prevented
from injuring others, by having his person and his property rendered answerable
for all damages, which he either occasions by his own rapacious violence or
caprice, or which he does not endeavor to prevent in others, as a member of
the tithing wherein any violence or offense is committed: for, according to the
law of frankpledge, no man is entitled to liberty Omnis homo, qui voluerit se
teneri PRO LIBERO, sit in plegio, ut plegius eum habeat ad justitiam si quid
offenderit, etc. See Lambard's Archionomia, p. 125. b.
, that is not duly pledged by his nearest neighbors for the mutual
conservation of peace and right.

Under this form of government, all public works, as entrenchments, or
earthworks, and fortifications, to secure the towns and strengthen the country;
canals, and highways, for public passage; sewers, and drains, for the general
health of the country, etc. may be formed and maintained by a rotation of
service; in which the value of daily attendance must be estimated, that
defaulters may bear their share, or rather a double share, of the burden: and
the expense of watch and ward, or military service, must be defrayed in the
same manner; by which means no debt will be incurred for the defense of the
state. Rich funds may also be obtained to support the credit of a public
exchequer, (without laying any perceptible burden on the community,) by a
general agreement to punish by fines and mulcts, in due proportion to the
wealth and possessions of delinquents; increasing likewise, by repetition, for
all offenses as well of omission (or neglect of public duty) as of commission;
except for murder, rapes, and unnatural crimes, which, by the laws of God, are
unpardonable by any community. The people themselves to be judges, people of
the vicinage, unexceptionably disinterested; liable, besides, to the challenge
of the parties, and duly sworn (according to the known laws of English juries)
to do right, in the presence of the ordinary judges, and officers elected to
preside and keep order in the assemblies.

GRANVILLE SHARP.
Old Jewry, Aug. 1, 1783.
TRACT, Number IV.
An easy and practicable Plan for laying out Settlements on uncultivated Lands,
in equal Divisions of ten Tithings, or 100 Families each; whereby new Colonies
may be most advantageously formed and extended in regular Districts of
Hundreds, agreeable to the ancient legal Divisions of our Anglo-Saxon Ancestors.
SEVERAL years ago I made some memorandums of A Method of forming frontier
Settlements, which I copied from the second edition of a book first printed at
Philadelphia, but reprinted at London in 1766, and entitled An Historical
Account of the Expedition against the Ohio Indians, in the Year 1764, under the
Command of Henry Bouquet, Esquire. to which are annexed Military Papers, containing
Reflections on the War with the Savages; a Method of forming frontier
Settlements, etc. My reference for the last-mentioned subject is to p. 51 of
the said book; but, as I have not the book itself at present, I cannot pretend
to be perfectly accurate in my quotations from it; neither do I remember
whether the author recommended a government by tithing and hundred courts, with
their proper officers, according to the Anglo-Saxon model; but only that his
proposed settlements were (happily for my present purpose) laid out in equal
divisions of one hundred lots each, for the maintenance of one hundred
families; so that, of course, the constitutional regulations for hundreds,
recommended in the preceding tracts, will not be less suitable and beneficial
to his scheme than his certainly is to mine.

"Let us suppose a settlement" (says he) to be formed for one hundred families,
composed of five persons each upon an average.

Lay out upon a river or creek, a squ. of 1760 yards; or a mile for each side.
That square will contain 640 acres. Allowance for streets and public uses 40
640 acres. To half an acre for every house 50 640 acres. To 100 lots at 5 acres
550 640 acres.
The four sides of the square measures 7040 yards, which gives to each house
about 70 yards in front, to stockade, and the ground, allowed for building,
will be 210 feet front and about 100 feet deep.

An acre of ground will produce at least 30 bushels of Indian corn; therefore,
two acres are sufficient to supply five persons at the rate of 12 bushels each
person; two other acres will be for cows and sheep, another for hay, or to be
sown with red clover; the remaining half acre may be laid out for a garden.
Thus far the author's plan may be applicable to lands even in England,
especially if laid out in less divisions of tithings, instead of hundreds,
preserving the same due proportion of land in lots for each family. The ten
families with their habitations would form a compact little village, under the
government of a tithing-man, annually elected from among themselves, whereby
all would be rendered mutually responsible for each other, for the common
peace; and to make good every damage that might be occasioned by the ill
behavior of any individual among them. An estate laid out in small farms, with
such a tithing village in the center of it, for a constant supply of laborers,
might be made to maintain a much greater number of people than land generally
does in the ordinary way of farming; and would, consequently, be much more
beneficial both to the landlords and to the nation at large. Commons and waste
forests or chases might thus be laid out and occupied by the laboring poor, to
the great reduction of parish rates as well as of the price of labor; for,
free and useful laborers would never be wanting, if such a regular provision,
under their own management could be found for their families. But the
possession of such parish-lots should be limited to those persons, who occupy
no other land; and should be delivered up to the parish or community, for the
use of other unprovided families, as soon as any possessor obtains more land,
either as a farm, or in fee, (as recommended in a former Tract,) to prevent the
monopoly of land, and the entire deprivation of the poor from any share in it,
as at present.

The remainder of the author's scheme is suitable only to unoccupied countries,
like many parts of Africa and America, where the people are few, and the lands
of small value, viz. "Round the town" (says he) are the commons of three miles
square, containing, exclusive of the lots abovementioned, 5120 acres. On three
sides of the town, five other squares will be laid out, of three square miles,
containing 5760 acres each; one of which is reserved for wood, for the use of
the settlement; the other four to be divided into 25 out-lots, or plantations,
of about 230 acres each; so that in the four squares there will be 100 such
plantations, for the 100 families. Another township may be laid out joining
this, upon the ^ame plan, and as many more as you please, upon the same line,
without losing any ground.

The following is a rough Sketch of the whole.



The banks of the river (as in ancient times) should be deemed common or public
as the river itself, under the conservation of the community; and should be
reserved for future improvements, (as for the accommodation, not only of
fishermen, but also of manufacturers, traders, and of all industrious
strangers,) and docks, or navigable cuts (whenever the level of the country
will permit) should be made from the river, as far back, at least, as the
center between every two townships.

The spaces between the squares are left for roads and common communications
between the several lots; and the roads which divide two distinct townships
should be still more spacious for the common use of all the inhabitants, the
cartage of their produce and other traffic, the driving of cattle, etc. and a
spacious road, to be formed lengthways throughout the whole settlement, ought,
in forming the lots, to be reserved through the center of each township: the
central lots, which will thereby be diminished in size, will find ample
compensation, in value, by their situation on the great central road, which I
have expressed by a dotted line. I do not remember whether any roads, or spaces
for them, were expressed in the original plan of the author.

I would likewise deviate from the original plan of the author, with respect to
the situation of the 5760 acres of woodland for each township; which, I
conceive, had better be reserved in one of the most distant squares, at an
angular situation from each town, instead of being in the opposite square,
according to his proposal: for the towns will not only be more healthy, by
having the uncleared lands more distant from them, but also the inhabitants,
when on watch and ward duty, will be better enabled to discover the approach of
any lurking savages, or other enemies in time of war.

GRANVILLE SHARP.
Old Jewry, Aug. 1, 1783.
TRACT, Number V.
A farther Declaration of the ancient popular, or congregational, Right to
elect Bishops; intended to illustrate, more effectually, a Maxim of the Common
Law, cited in p. 91, viz. Ordo Episcoporum est Robur Reipublicae. Jenk. Cent.
p. 56.
"ORDO EPISCOPORUM EST ROBUR REIPUBLICAE." Jenk. Cent. p. 56.
IT is an established maxim of the common law of England, that The order of
bishops is the strength (force or hability) "of the commonwealth." But, in
order to render this maxim obvious and unquestionable, we must necessarily
imply and include, in the episcopal function, that very important branch of it
already mentioned, viz. the presiding as chief popular magnistrates in the
congregational courts of common law See second note in p. 92. "Leges Edgari,"
etc.
; and we must also suppose the continuance or reestablishment of the primitive
christian freedom in episcopal elections; that the bishops, by real popular
elections, may be truly popular magistrates, worthy to be entrusted with the
civil as well as the ecclesiastical INTERESTS of the commonwealth. Mr. Sadler,
in his Rights of the Kingdom, speaking of the time of K. Henry II. says, -- It
seems considerable, how all historians (of that time and dispute) do record,
THE CHOICE OF BISHOPS to be in the PEOPLE: in PLEBE and in POPULO, as well as
in CLERO. They mention RADULPH, ordained a bishop for the Orcades: but rejected
by all, because not elected by COMMON ASSENT of the PEOPLE; PLEBIS, CLERO For
cleri.
, PRINCIPIS, it is every where in the old monks; and how the poor bishop
wandered up and down, as an assistant to other prelates, etc. See p. 235, and
more instances also at p. 243. The learned author of a tract, (printed several
years ago, as appears by the list of tracts published at the same time, but
without a date,) entitled, Lex Parliamentaria, or a Treatise of the Law and
Custom of Parliament, etc. has cited various proofs of the people's right to
elect bishops. -- "That for some years," (says he,) after this new charter
granted in this English parliament, (meaning a parliament held at London by K.
Henry I.) the PEOPLE were generally RESTORED to the right of electing their own
magistrates and officers, civil, military, and ECCLESIASTICAL; and this (says
the learned author) I take to be the grand foundation of the MAGNA CHARTA of
English liberties, i.e. as it gave relaxation from Norman tyranny and slavery.
And this may teach us, that the rights and liberties of the commons of England,
are neither so illegally begotten as by rebellion, nor of such tender years, as
some imagine. But, if any man is not convinced from what I have before
produced, touching the origin of English parliaments, and the antiquity of the
house of commons, let him peruse the authors cited in the margin Dier 60 and
70. See Mirror, c. 1. sect. 3. Bra. Flet. Lambard's Archaion, 57, 239, 245. Sir
R. Atkins, p. 20. 17. etc. Vide Post. c. 6 and 7.
, especially the treatise writ by that learned judge Sir Robert Atkins, on this
very subject.

Nor was this the first English parliament held under this king, Mat. Paris has
given us a brief account 37, 39. 2 Inst. 15. Saxon Chron. sub anno 1099. p.
208, 210. Flor. Wig. etc. Mat. Par. 39.
, (which other authors confirm and enlarge,) that one Ranulph, bishop of
Durham, (whom Mat. etc. adorn with the sublime titles of, Vir pessimus, and
corruptissimus; homo perversus and ad omne scelus paratus; vir subacto ingenio
and profunda nequitia, etc.) was imprisoned, etc. by a common council or
parliament of Englishmen. The whole passage runs thus, Eo tempore rex tenuit in
custodia Ranulphum Dunelmelsum, episcopum hominem perversum and ad omne scelus
paratum, quem frater regis i.e. rex Willielmus episcopum "The office of a court
bishop."
fecerat Dunelm. and regni Anglorum subversorem; qui cum regi jam dicto nimium
esset familiaris, constituerat eum rex, procuratorem suum in regno, ut
evelleret, destrueret, raperet, et disperderet, et omnia omnium bona ad fisci
commodum comportaret. Sed mortuo eodim rege iniquo and Henrico coronato, de
communi consilio gentis Anglorum, posuit rex eum in vinculis, etc.

Nor was the concurrence of the commons in parliament requisite only to the
imprisonment or exauctoration of bishops Rights of the kingdom, p. 118, 133,
140, etc.
, the same assent seems as necessary, and that too in a superior degree, as to
their election or confirmation; diverse instances of this appear in the
historians of those times: I shall select some to prove it then the custom of
England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, France, etc.

Anno 1113, Ralph, bishop of Rochester Sax. Chr. p. 306.
, was elected archbishop of Canterbury by the king, annuente plebe and clero
Eadmer.
; this was done in communi consilio apud Windsore Hoveden.
, And I find, about the same time, that another Ralph, who had been ordained a
bishop in Scotland, was rejected by all, because not elected with the consent
of the people, etc. and, notwithstanding his consecration, was forced to wander
about, and officiate as a coadjutor to other bishops.

About the year 1120 Malmsb.
, one David was consecrated bishop of Bangor, by the then archbishop of
Canterbury; but it is expressly said, that he had been thereto elected, a
principe clero and populo Walliae, i. e. by a Welsh parliament. And in the same
reign one Gregory, an Irish abbot, was elected to the bishopric of Dublin, a
rege Hiberniae and clero and populo, an Irish parliament. So that the commons,
at this time, were a constituent part of the Scottish, Welsh, and Irish,
parliaments, as well as with us in England.

And in the year 1128 Vide Sax. Chr. sub An. 1127.
, I find that famed scholar, Gilbertus Universalis, to be elected and
consecrated bishop of London, annuente clero and populo. This seems at a
parliament at London.

But this right of the commons, in electing bishops, does more clearly appear
in Henry II.'s time, when all historians agree it to be a general custom both
here and in France (and seems founded on diverse express canons of the primitive
church.) Insomuch, as Mezeray, in his history, asserts, that until that time
(i. e. the middle of the 12th century) the voice of the people in electing
bishops, was esteemed the voice of God.

Even the histories, published by papal authority, bear ample testimony of the
people's right, and the exercise of it in ancient times, though it has been
long usurped by that very authority. See Italia Sacra, (the History of the
Italian Bishops, cited in the former tract,) vol. I. p. 1284, in the account of
the bishops of Tarracina; where it is expressly declared, that, on the death of
Avitus, bishop of Tarracina, St. Valentine was elected bishop by the CLERGY and
PEOPLE of that city S. Valentinus Clari, et Flaviae nobiliss. Terracinensium
filius, defuncto Avito, a CLERO et POPULO ejusdem civitutis episcopus electus,
etc.
St. Valentine is said to have suffered martyrdom about the year 362.

In the account of the archbishops of Florence, (vol. III. p. 12. of the said
work,) Zenobius, about the year 376, is said to have been elected, not only by
the clergy, but by ALL THE PEOPLE; which unanimity was esteemed a divine call,
not lawfully to be refused. Non solum a clero, sed etiam ab universo populo
solemniter ad PONTIFICATUS This expression, "pontificatus" for episcopatus, is
much more modern than the times to which it is here applied, though considered,
perhaps, as a synonymous term by the compiler of this history; who, of course,
may be supposed to express himself in the modern language of his own times.
There are many examples of the like gross misapplication of this word, and also
of pontifex for episcopus, by ecclesiastical historians; but we are not
therefore to conceive that they found these words, so applied, in the ancient
records from which they compiled their histories. For the word pontifex did not
signify a christian bishop, the etymology of the word being deducible entirely
from a gross PAGAN ceremony, (as I have already shown in p. 64.) peculiar to
ROME itself, and applicable to none but the pagan augurs of ROME, until the
Roman emperors of the Western branch usurped the title of PONTIFEX MAXIMUS, for
political purposes; and, whilst they continued in power to maintain it, (which
they did at least to the death of Valentinian III. A.C. 455, if not to the time
of Augustulus, when the Western branch of the Roman empire was entirely
abolished by Odoacer, in the year 477,) no bishop could either have the power,
or even an inducement to assume the title of pontifex, until the imperial head,
to which it was inseparably annexed, became, "as it were, wounded to death,"
nor until the time was come, that this "deadly wound" was to be "healed;" and
woe be to that bishop who first disgraced his function by that fatal mark!
apicem est ELECTUS. Nec vero licuit ei reniti, vel obsistere ISTIUS MODI
ELECTIONI, quorum, ut praefatus sum, ita CONSENSU et ANNISU OMNIUM suorum
CONCIVIUM fuerat postulatus ad ejusdem ecclesiae gubernacula, ut palam daretur
intelligi, DIVINITUS eum ad ejusmodi fuisse officium invitatum.
And, about the year of Christ 443, Silvianus, an African, was elected bishop
of Tarracina, a clero et populo, (tom. I. p. 1290.) But the language,
respecting the appointment of the bishops of Tarracina, was totally different
in the very next century; nay, even under their Saint Gregory, or Pope Gregory
THE GREAT, the papal usurpation, on the rights both of clergy and people, was
become shamefully notorious! for we read of bishops taking the charge of the
church of Tarracina, ex imperio MAGNI GREGORII, by the command of GREAT
GREGORY! GREAT Gregory indeed he might well be called; for the popes having,
then lately, See p. 65.
revived the imperial title of PONTIFEX MAXIMUS, were become suitably great and
imperious in their language; so that, notwithstanding the counter-title of
servus servorum Dei which Gregory had hypocritically assumed, as a cloak of
humility, to cover the pride of the former title, yet, in his imperious
language, he sufficiently manifested the character of the "little horn,"
foretold by Daniel, (chapter vii. 8.) in which were eyes, like the eyes of a man,
(i. e. the horn was to be a bishop, or rather a succession of bishops, who are
properly see-ers, or overseers, viz. (...), very aptly represented by "the eyes
of a man,") and a mouth speaking great things. And, accordingly, we read of
Agnellus, bishop of Funda, (or Fanda,) who managed the church of Tarracina 'ex
imperio,' by the command of GREAT GREGORY. Aguellus Fundanus, episcopus,
Tarracinensem ecclesiam administravit, EX IMPERIO MAGNI GREGORII, etc. (tom. I.
p. 1291.)
And also, that Constantius, bishop of Palermo, had charge of the flock of
Tarracina, 'ex imperio,' by the COMMAND of the same St. Gregory, the pontifex.
Constantius Panormitanus, episcopus, curam gessit de grege Tarracinen. EX
IMPERIO ejusdem S. Gregorii pontif. uti palam fit ex lib. 7. epist. 14. (tom.
I. p. 1291.)
Thus the popes began to elude the election of bishops, by appointing other
bishops to take care of the vacant sees: but they afterward boldly took the
election, even nominally, upon themselves; which, before, they had usurped
indeed in effect, but did not so openly profess; and accordingly, in the very
same page, we read of one Ambrosius, a MONK, being ELECTED bishop of Tarracina,
by pope Alexander II. in the year 1071; ab Alexandro II. ELECTUS fuit
episcopus, an. 1071; and also of one Gregory, another MONK, being elected
Gregorius MONACHUS Casinensis, a Paschali II. pontifice ELECTUS, etc.
bishop of Tarracina, by pope Paschal II.

The popes obtained this absolute dominion over episcopal elections by various
arts and wiles and by gradual encroachments, craftily made, according to the
circumstances of the people they intended to deceive from time to time; and
they always advanced in their demands after the admission of every unjust
claim; which demonstrates the danger of swerving, in any respect, from
primitive usages. The monkish clergy in every part of the world, in proportion
as the false notions of the sanctity of celibacy advanced and prevailed, were
regularly the instruments employed in thus sapping the rights of the clergy and
people. But the fathers at the council of Laodicea (which was as early as the
year of Christ 365, or 367; according to bishop Beveridge. See Dr. Cave's Hist.
Eccles. p. 231.) did not proceed so gradually in sapping the rights of the
people, but boldly excluded them, at once, from all interference at episcopal
elections, (see canon XII.) and also from the appointment of priests, (see
canon XIII.) which, however, as the learned patriarch of Antioch, Balsamon, has
remarked, affords proof that not only BISHOPS were elected, in ancient times,
by THE MULTITUDES, (or people,) " but even the PRIESTS also (...) (says
Balsamon) (...), etc. That the people were allowed a share in the election,
even of their priests, as well as of their bishops, appears also by a quotation
which I find in the M. S. notitia ecclesiastica, of the learned Dr. Mangey
before cited, viz. Did. LXXVI. Can. Quicunque exinde jam accessu temporum
PRESBYTERIO vel EPISCOPATUI, si eum CLERI et PLEBIS evocaverit ELECTIO,
societur. Vide Anton. Aug. Epic. Juris Pont. lib. 3. tit. -- 4. (the figure
preceding the 4 is blotted, and not legible,) " et lib. 4. tit. 18." And that
it was an established practice in Spain, for the clergy and people, of each
city or district, to elect priests, appears by the 19th canon of the fourth
council of Toledo. Sed nec ille deinceps SACERDOS erit, quem nec CLERUS, nec
POPULUS, propriae civitatis ELEGERIT, vel auctoritas metropolitani vel
comprovincialium sacerdotum assensio exquesivit, etc. Consilium Toletarum IV.
anno C. 633. Sacrosancta Concilia, tom. 5. Par. edit. 1671.
."

The monkish prelates in the second council of Arles, at a much later period,
(A.D. 452,) durst not proceed so rapidly against the peoples right of election,
though shamefully bold, at that time, in promoting "the doctrines of doemons,"
by prohibiting marriage, or (in the words of scripture) "forbidding to marry."
See the second, third, fourth, and 43d, 44th, 45th, and 52d, canons of that
council. But with respect to episcopal elections, they seem to have affected an
imitation (though a very delusive one) of the ancient mode of electing two or
three persons, (as described in a note of a former tract, p. 88 -- 90.) and
they thought themselves obliged still to acknowledge that the people were
entitled to some share in the election; which, however, they reduced to as
small a proportion as they could venture to do at that time, and craftily
stated it in a most precarious light, to leave room for farther innovation;
viz. that THREE PERSONS should be nominated by the bishops, (i. e. instead of
the people, as before,) out of which three persons, the CLERGY, OR CITIZENS,
should have power to elect ONE. "Placuit," (thus like popes and kings they
manifested their "will and pleasure" against right,) in ordinatione episcopi
hunc ordinem custodire, ut primo loco venalitate vel ambitione submota TRES ab
episcopis nominentur, de quibus CLERICI VEL CIVES erga unum eligendi habeant
potestatem. Concilium Arelatense II. can. 54. Howel's Synop. Can. p. 202. These
are farther proofs of the "deceivableness of unrighteousness," (mentioned in
p.72 -- 75.) by which the monastic clergy rendered themselves too generally the
notorious instruments of "the man of sin!"
The word VEL is artfully inserted, instead of the copulative ET, between the
words CLERICI and CIVES, that the acknowledged right of the CITIZENS, might be
occasionally suppressed, whenever the temper of the times would permit. The
same crafty insertion of vel for et Metropolitanus episcopus a
comprovincialibus episcopis, clericis VEL populis electus, etc. Howel's Synop.
can. p. 241.
may be seen in the seventh canon of the second council of Orleans, (concilium
Aurelianense ii. A.D. 533.) where it is manifestly intended as a preparatory
step to the suppression of the people's share in the election.

The like monkish craft appears also in the third canon of the third council of
Orleans De comprovincialibus vero ordinandis, cum consensu metropoliti cleri
VEL civium, etc. (Ibid. p. 245.)
, A.D. 538. But, though this deceitful mode of innovation could pass at Arles
and Orleans, yet it was too gross to be admitted in the capital of France at a
still later period; for, even so late as the third council of Paris, A. D. 557.
we find the right of the clergy and people to elect bishops (expressly, juxta
antiquam consuetudinem, etc.) publicly asserted and established; and even the
royal interference, or MANDATE, most carefully, and in express terms,
PROHIBITED See Sacrosancta Consilia, tom. 5. p. 814. Paris edit. 1671.
Concilium Parisiense III. circa annum Christi DLVII. Pelagii Papae III.
Childeberti Regis XLVI. C.VIII. -- Et quia in aliquibus rebus consuetudo prisca
negligitur, ac decreta canonum violantur, placuit ut juxta antiquam
consuetudinem canonum decreta serventur. Nullus, civibus invitis, ordinetur
episcopus, nisi quem populi et clericorum electio plenissima quaesierit
voluntate. NON PRINCIPIS IMPERIO, neque per quamlibet conditionem contra
metropolis voluntatem, vel Episcoporum comprovincialium, ingeratur. Quod si PER
ORDINATIONEM REGIAM henoris istius culmen pervadere aliquis nimia temeritate
praesumpserit, a comprovincialibus loci ipsius Episcopus recipi nullatenus
mereatur, quem indebite ordinatum agnoscunt. Si quis de Comprovincialibus
recipere contra interdicta praesumpserit, sit a fratribus omnibus segregatus,
et ab ipsorum omnium caritate semotus, etc. And because, in some things, the
ancient usage is neglected, and the decrees of the canons are violated, it
pleased, (the assembly to ordain,) that the decrees of the canons should be
observed, according to ancient usage, no person, contrary to the will of (any)
citizens, shall be ordained bishop, except him whom the election of the people
and clergy shall have required by the most ample desire, (by the most manifest
majority in sentiment.) Let not any bishop be brought in by the command of the
prince, (or king,) "nor through any condition" "(or terms) whatsoever, against
the will of the metropolitan or of the con-provincial bishops. But if, by royal
appointment, any bishop, with too much rashness, shall presume to pass through
(or attain) the summit of this honor, he by no means deserves to be received
by the con-provincial bishops of that province, whom they know to be unduly
appointed. If any one of the conprovincial bishops shall presume to receive
him, contrary to (these) prohibitions, let him be severed from all the
brethren, and removed from the esteem of all of them, etc. Which is clearly the
penalty of excommunication decreed against any bishop that shall presume to
acknowledge the authority of any royal appointment to the dignity of a bishop:
and they had it in their power to render such appointments null and void, by
refusing the essential introduction to the office; the giving an episcopal
commission, by laying on of hands and previous prayer.
. But the grand enemy to law and right, (...), the PAPAL POWER, found means, at
length to dispense with this just Parisian law; for pope Zacharias, the same
that absolved Pepin from his oath of allegiance to king Childeric III. thought
proper also, in the plenitude of his dispensing power, to INDULGE king Pepin,
that he might NOMINATE bishops to be ordained throughout the kingdom of France,
as any sees should become vacant. See Italia Sacra, tom I. p. 19. "Hic
pontifex," (speaking of Sanctus Zacharias, a Benedictine monk, made pope, A.D.
741.) Pipino regi Francorum INDULSIT, ut per Galliae regnum in episcopos
ordinandos, ubi seeds vacasset aliqua, NOMINARET.


The danger of regal influence, in episcopal elections, had been early foreseen
and carefully guarded against, not only by the council of Paris, (last cited,)
but also by the primitive church The peculiar care and caution of the primitive
church, to preserve episcopal elections from undue influence, is worthy to be
remarked, because it demonstrates the existence and pre-eminence of the
episcopal order in the church, (clearly distinct and superior in office and
degree to the order of presbytery,) from the apostolic times: and, though all
bishops must certainly be presbyters, yet the constantre-ordination of every
presbyter after being elected or nominated to the office of a bishop (by the
same essential rites of solemn prayer for the guidance and assistance of the
Holy Spirit, with the imposition of hands) demonstrates, that presbyters,
though really pastors, and, in some respect, overseers of distinct flocks or
congregations of christians, yet were not properly bishops ((...)) in the
primitive ecclesiastical sense, until admitted to that dignity by the renewal
of their sacred orders with the express designation to the episcopal function:
for the essential rights of ordination, (prayer for the Holy Spirit and laying
on of hands,) are the same, for all the three degrees of the christian
ministry, differing only in the designation to their respective duties of
deacons, presbyters, and bishops.
, and thereby the wickedness of this lawless pope, and his INDULGENCE to K.
Pepin, is rendered the more conspicuous! The learned bishop Beveridge gives a
decided opinion that the 30th canon of the ancient codex, which he calls codex
canonum primitivae ecclesiae, was necessarily ordained, lest any person, by
money or MEANS OF SECULAR POWERS, should be promoted, but ONLY by the free
election of THE CLERGY and PEOPLE. Ne quis pecunia, aut SECULARIUM POTESTATUM
open, sed LIBERA-TANTUM CLERI POPULIQUE ELECTIONE promoveatur. See his "Codex
Canonum Ecclesiae primitivae vindicatus," etc. p. 209.
But no comment can be more clear and decided, than the canon itself in
guarding against the interference of princes, viz. if any BISHOP, having
availed himself (of the power or influence) of WORLDLY PRINCES, shall through
them have obtained authority over a church, let him he deposed and separated,
(or excommunicated,) and also all those that communicate (or have fellowship)
with him. (...) See bishop Beveridge's "Codex Canonum Primitivae Ecclesiae,"
can. 30. p. 442.
The council of Paris, before cited, seems to have copied the spirit of this
law. Thus the most jealous republicans may be convinced that episcopacy has no
necessary connection with monarchy; but, on the contrary, is an institution
which ought to be entirely independent of it; independent, I mean, with respect
only to NOMINATION or election to the dignity: so that royal mandates and
letters missive, with the "conge d'elire," are by no means founded in right,
but are only modern encroachments, promoted by popes and monks when they were
unable to monopolize the power of election to themselves; for they would rather
throw the nomination into the power and will of arbitrary princes than see it
lawfully exercised by the clergy and people; provided their partial favor
toward royalty were admitted as an "INDULGENCE" from their own plenitude of
power! But, though king Pepin was base enough to avail himself of the
presumptuous and wicked encroachment of pope Zachary on the people's rights,
yet his son and grandson were more honorable than their ancestor, and, instead
of basely accepting this most unjust papal indulgence, on the contrary asserted
the popular right to elect bishops in the plainest and most unequivocal terms,
and nobly and disinterestedly rescued it from the usurpations of the monkish
clergy, which had almost universally prevailed for some time before. For the
emperor CHARLES THE GREAT most nobly ordained, That bishops should be chosen
according to the statutes of the canons, by the ELECTION OF THE CLERGY AND
PEOPLE of the proper diocese. See Capitularia Caroli Magni, lib. i. 83. Ut
episcopi PER ELECTIONEM CLERI et POPULI secundum statuta canonum de propria
diocesi elegantur.
And the emperor Lewis the Good, or Ludovicus Pius, also asserted the same just
rights of the clergy and people: Let a bishop be elected by the CLERGY and
PEOPLE of the proper diocese, without respect of persons, or bribes, (but) on
account of worthiness of life, and gift of wisdom. See Capitularia Ludovici
Pii, which are annexed to the canons of the third council of Aix, ( Concilium
Aquisgranense III. A. D. 816. sub Ludovico Pio celebratum, cap. 2.) Episcopus
per CLERUM et POPULUM eligatur, de propria dioecesi absque personarum et
munerum acceptione, ob vitae meritum et sapientiae donum. (Howel's Synop. Can.
p. 407.)


These excellent laws would probably have continued in force much longer than
they did, if they had been observed with the primitive precautions stated in a
former note, viz. to elect two, and afterward to decide by lot; because this
ancient mode of exercising the joint elective rights of CLERGY and PEOPLE is so
safe and perfectly unexceptionable, that it must have obviated the plausible
objection that was usually alleged, by popes and monks, against POPULAR
elections; i.e. the danger of exciting party animosities and tumults. The
monks, however, were not able entirely to set aside these excellent
constitutions of Charles and Lewis, for several years afterward; and the
influence of them seems to have extended even to Rome itself: for the bishops
at a lateran council, not less than 45 years afterward, (viz. A. D. 861.)
asserted the rights of the clergy and people; and even the pope himself,
(Nicolas I.) concurred! the more willingly perhaps, because the general purpose
of the canons, then made, was to curb the extravagance of a rival metropolitan,
John VIII. archbishop of Ravenna, whose province was entitled Aemilia. The
very first canon was to restrain the archbishop from consecrating bishops
throughout (the province of) Aemilia, except after THE ELECTION OF THE CLERGY
AND PEOPLE; a testimony highly to the point in question, and the more
especially, if we consider that it proceeded from a quarter, the seat of
usurpation, that had long been inimical to all popular rights! See caput
primum, -- Episcopos per AEMILIAM non consacres, nisi post electionem CLERI et
POPULI, (Italia Sacra, tom. 2. p. 347.) This canon would have done more honor,
however, to the lateran council, and pope Nicolas, had it extended to episcopal
elections in general, instead of being confined to the province of Aemilia. The
archbishop of Aemilia had probably encroached on the elective rights of the
clergy and people of his province; but this alone could not have been
considered, at Rome, as a crime, (it having been the regular practice of the
popes themselves,) had he not, at the same time, professed independence of the
Roman see: and the Pontif, though probably, like his prececessors, a natural
enemy to the elective rights of the clergy and people, was content, it seems,
to acknowledge them, whilst the reformation tended to reduce the pretensions of
his rival: and indeed he gained a complete conquest over him, by means of this
lateran council, wherein he reduced him to the pitiful dilemma of accepting a
continuance of his preferment on the most humiliating terms of submission to
the Roman See, (which was by no means due from a metropolitan bishop,) and
compelled him basely and dishonestly to yield up the just rights and
independence of his province to the encroaching jurisdiction of the papal power.

A very few years afterward, (about the year 877,) pope John VIII. (or rather
John IX. as he is styled by Platina Many ancient writers of good repute
represent pope John VIII. to have been a woman; and some of them add, that he
was even an English woman! It is therefore to avoid the throwing any farther
unnecessary blame on our reputed countrywoman, that I say, rather John IX. than
John VIII. because the times I speak of were about the quarter part of a
century later than the period usually assigned for the infallible dominion of
our extraordinary English pope. Of late, indeed, it has been a sort of fashion
amongst protestant writers, as well as papists, to deem the story of pope Joan
a mere fable: thus much, however, is certain, that, if it be a fable, it was
not invented by the protestants. Accounts of it were written by undoubted
catholics, some centuries before the reformation, and these accounts were even
printed several years before either Luther or Calvin were preachers. Martin
(the author quoted for it by Platina) was a dominican friar, apostolic-chaplain
under pope Nicolas III. A.D. 1277; and was afterward a popish archbishop in
Poland; so that, from his situation and rank in life, it was neither probable
that he should want the best information on that subject, which the times he
lived in could afford, nor that he should adopt such a story, had it not been
current and generally admitted at that time. Platina, who quotes him, was
employed by pope Sixtus IV. to write the History of the Popes; and would not
surely have quoted this story from Martin if he had thought that it might with
propriety have been absolutely rejected; but, on the contrary, he is so far
from making Martin alone answerable for the story, that he declares it to be
the common report; " Haec quae dixi VULGO FERUNTUR," commonly reported, it
seems, by several authors; whom he is pleased, however, to deem uncertain and
obscure, ("incertis tamen et obscuris auctoribus,") though he had no right to
include Martin in this vague censure. In the very next sentence, however, he
entirely exculpates him (as well as his obscure authors) from the invention of
the story, by adding, that it was "what almost all affirm," "quod fere omnes
affirmant," see p. 57. a. This was printed at Venice in 15^4. Werneris
Rollwinck; who; in his "Fasciculus Temporum," relates the story without
expressing the least doubt about the truth of it, was a Carthusian friar; so
that he was as little likely, as the two former writers, to publish this
account through any pique or prejudice against the papacy. Rollwink has also
added, that this John was the sixth pope who had the name of sanctity, without
the thing itself; and, like others, was also smitten of God, and not placed in
the catalogue of pontiffs. Et hic sextus videtur fuisse PAPA, qui nomen
sanctitatis sine re habuit usque huc, et similiter sicut alii a Deo plagatus
fuit, nec ponitur in catalogo Pontificum. See p. 66. b. This was printed in the
year 1488. In the chronicle of Sigebert, the story is related as a current
report, i. e. fama, -- "Fama est hunc Joannem foeminam fuisse," etc. This
author was a Benedictine monk, about the year 1100, and his work was printed by
H. Stephens, the French king's printer, at Paris, in 1513; so that there is no
reason to suspect either the author or the printer of partiality against
popery. Of all these different authors, except the first, (Martin,) I have the
printed copies before me of the several dates abovementioned. Many other
authors I find quoted for the story, who were also professed Roman Catholics;
as Marianus Scotus, a monk at Mentz, who wrote a chronicle about the year 1069,
the chronicle also of Petrarque, printed at Florence in 1478. That of
Antoninus, who was archbishop of Florence, and died A. D. 1459, that of the
abbe Trithemius, and also the commentaries of Raphael Volatteranus, dedicated
to pope Julius II. etc. etc. etc. and all before the protestant times. So that
the fable, if it is one, must not be attributed to protestants; but we cannot
say so much for the opposition that has been made to it; for the protestants
may certainly be said to have innocently occasioned it, though they cannot
justly be answerable for the futility of the far-fetched arguments and
pretenses that have been raked together by learned Jesuits for that purpose.
The advancement of the reformation rendered it necessary, indeed, for the
honor of the eternal city, to patch up and plaster over the incurable sores
and blains of the papal pretenders to infallibility; but, after all the pains
that have been taken, the reasons, or rather excuses, alleged for the first
introduction of the perforated chair, (the famous "seeds stercoraria," see
Platina, p. 57.) are so frivolous and unsatisfactory, that they seem much more
improbable and fabulous than the plain fable itself, (as they presume to call
it,) which most naturally accounts for the absurdity!
) openly availed himself of this newly acquired extension of power, by
ostentatiously submitting the archbishops of Ravenna, (together with the
archbishops also of Milan,) against all probability of right or seemliness, to
the jurisdiction of the bishops of Pavia, or more properly Papia; a very
ominous appellation, derived, as even my popish author admits, (see Italia
Sacra, tom. I. p. 1075.) from the Latin interjection PAPE! O wonderful, or O
strange! The Pontif, however, thought himself obliged to admit, at the same
time, the elective rights of the clergy and people of PAVIA, probably the
better to secure, from examination and opposition, the usurped authority of the
"privilegium," (as he called it,) whereby he exalted the bishops of Papia,
above their brethren, the independent metropolitans of Ravenna and Milan. This
"privilegium" would not have been mentioned by me, had it not contained an
express testimony " -- Decernimus, ut, si humana contradictione" (probably for
condition) tuae sedis episcopus ex hoc mundo migraverit, de proprio clero quem
idoneum prae caeteris CLERUS et POPULUS repererit, potestatem habeant secundum
statuta venerabilium patrum, et Romanae sedis antistitum, nulla seculari
contradicente potentia, eligendi episcopum. Italia Sacra, tom. I. p. 1086.
to the popular right of election. And the author of Italia Sacra, speaking
farther of this Pope John, and Bishop John, relates, that the latter obtained
these and also other privileges, in a council held at Papia by Pope John; but
these, it seems, were the chief, as being the only privileges he has
particularized; "In quo" (concilio) ab eodem PONTIFICE ALIA obtinuit
PRIVILIGIA, ac praecipue, ut POPULO, CLEROQUE Papiensi SUUM EPISCOPUM ELIGENDI
JUS ESSET, eidemque concessit, ut quoties Mediolanensem, ac Ravennatensem
archiepiscopos cum suis suffraganeis ad synodum vocaret, accederent, etc.
Italia Sacra, tom. I. p. 1087.

About seven or eight years before this time, viz. A. D. 869 or 870, the 36th
council of Constantinople (entitled, by the popish or Latin party, the eighth
general council) wickedly declared against the unalienable popular right of
electing Bishops, and formed a canon expressly against it. Pope John therefore,
on the last-mentioned occasion, might have (besides his partiality to the
bishop of Papia) a still farther inducement for re-establishing the clergy and
people of Papia in their just right of election, viz. to demonstrate the
plenitude of his power in dispensing with laws; because, whatever tends to
aggrandize the papal jurisdiction may sometimes afford an ample reason even for
a Pontif to do right! The same reason, probably, may be assigned for the
continuance of popular elections, even at Rome itself, long after the said
decree of the general council against them; for pope Adrian III. in the year
895, was "so bold," ( "tanti animi fuit," says Platina,) in behalf of this just
right, that he announced it to the senate and people, viz. that, in creating a
pope, the authority of the emperor should not be waited for; and that the
suffrages of THE CLERGY and PEOPLE should be free. Adrianus III. patria
Romanus: patre Benedicto: tanti animi fuit: ut init o pontificatus sui statim
ad senatum populumque retulerit: anno Domini DCCCXCV ne in creando pontifice
imperatoris auctoritas expectaretur: utque libera essent et cleri et p^puli
suffraga: quod quidem inst tu um a Nicolao primo tenta um potiusquam inchoatum
diximus. But ma^k the leading cause of Adrian's boldness; I^lectum credo hac
opportunitate Adrianum: quod Karolus Imperator ab Italia cum exer^itu
discedeus: in Normannos rebellantes moyerat.
And he adds, that this institution was rather attempted than begun by pope
Nicolas I. But this, however, was not the case; for even he himself relates in
his accounts of pope Nicolas, on the preceding page, not only that the clergy
and people did really elect without waiting for the imperial will, but also,
that letters were afterward received from the emperor Lewis (II.) in which he
highly commended the Romans, that they had knowingly and wholly created their
own chief pontif, without waiting for the wish of others, who, perhaps, in that
business, through the want of personal knowledge, might have had less
judgment. Supervenere a Ludovico imperatore literae: quibus Romanos adniodum
laudat: quod summum pontisicem sciente et integre creassent: non expectato
aliorum voto: qui forte ea in re ob ignorationem personarum minus judicii
habuissen.


It is manifest, therefore, that Platina was inclined to attribute the merit of
promoting free popular elections, at Rome, rather to the Pope than to the
Emperor, to whom it was more strictly due, even according to his own evidence:
for Popes and Monks could not endure a concurrent right of the people in
episcopal elections, except when it might seem to aggrandize the holy see as a
peculiar privilege; or unless it were admitted in any particular place by papal
favor and indulgence, as at Papia, for the like purpose of aggrandizement! But
in all other cases they were the regular professed enemies to popular right; so
that to their influence, and not to the influence of imperial or royal power,
is the wicked decree against free elections to be attributed. And this was
carried, it seems, on the stale pretense of probable tumults, and the confusion
that a multitude of electors might occasion, just as the present tumults in
Westminster afford, to the enemies of the English constitution, an exulting
argument against the ancient right of frequent elections; who, instead of being
willing to correct the abuse of an institution, would rather destroy the
profitable use of it: but such perverse reasoners are either deplorably
ignorant, or else shamefully wicked: for the same argument holds equally good
for robbing the people of their pecuniary property; because many of them make a
very improper use of what little money they have to spare; and indeed the
robbery would be much less dishonest and sinful in the latter case than in the
former; for, though both are rights of the people, and cannot therefore be
infringed without iniquity and injustice, which are hateful in the sight of
God, yet the right of election (whether it be to civil or ecclesiastical
offices) is inestimable, and above price; so that no plea of expedience, or
even of "necessity," can justify the gross dishonesty of infringing it. They
might as well persuade us to cut off our legs, lest we should strain our ancles
in walking! or absolutely to prohibit all men from riding on horseback, because
some men have had dangerous falls, and others have accidentally lost their
lives by it! yet such arguments are not more grossly absurd than this pretense
of tumults as a reason for robbing the people of their election rights; and yet
this absurdity prevailed in the 36th council of Constantinople, though the
popular right was expressly allowed! On a longtemps conserve aux laics LE DROIT
d'assister aux elections, (says Herycourt in his Analyze, p. 17.) et d'y donner
leur suffrage. La CONFUSION QUE POUVOIT CAUSER LA MULTITUDE DES ELECTEURS
engagea a n'y admettre plus que la clerge. On en fit un decret expres dans la
VIII. concile general. [For so he styles (but very improperly) the 36th council
held at Constantinople, in 869.] Ce changement n'a point empeche que l'on ne
fut oblige de demander le consentement des SOVEREIGNS. And this obligation, to
ask the consent of sovereigns, monkish prelates were content to endure,
(notwithstanding that the interference of all secular Princes in episcopal
elections is strictly forbid by the canons of the primitive church, see p.
317.) provided they could but prevail on the Monarchs to join them in effecting
an entire exclusion of the people's right to elect. However neither the
monkish, nor the monarchical, influence could entirely overcome the popular
right in England, until many years afterward, which I have already proved by
several incontestible examples. But it was far otherwise in France: for, even
in the same century, (ninth,) the Kings of France (instead of maintaining equal
justice between the clergy and people, like their predecessors Charles the
Great, and Lewis I. and II.) now claimed to themselves the NOMINATION of
BISHOPS; of which I find a memorandum in the learned Dr. Mangey's Notitia
Ecclesiastica, before cited, viz. "It seems" (says he) that in the ninth
century the kings of France claimed the NOMINATION of Bishops. And, if this
monarchical usurpation of the most essential popular right in the Christian
church was not actually promoted by the Roman "mystery of iniquity," (for I
have already given an instance of Pope Saint Zachariah's plenary indulgence to
such dishonesty, see p. 315.) it had, at leastafterwards, the express consent
of the Roman court, provided that the papal share of the unlawful plunder might
be admitted with it: and accordingly we read of THE CONCORDATE (as formerly
between the murderer Herod and Pontius Pilate, now also) between Pope Leo X.
and K. Francis: The Pope COLLATES upon the King's NOMINATION. This memorandum I
found in Dr. Mangey's Notitia Ecclesiastica, for which he cites Herycourt, lib.
1. c. 6. Le CONCORDAT fait enter Leon X. et Francois I. a transfere a nos Rois
tout le DROIT des electeurs. The concordate made between Leo X. and K. Francis
I. has transferred to our Kings all the right of the electors. This
indiscriminate writer could not perceive (or, if he did, he must be charged
with a much worse fault than indiscrimination) that the DROIT of the electors
could not be transferred by those who had no right in it; and, consequently,
that the kings of France do not exercise a DROIT, but a TORT, as long as their
unjust usurpation of the DROIT continues; and I wish I could speak more
favorably of the usurpation of our elective rights in England!

The rights of episcopal elections, as well as the nature of the episcopal
office itself, have, indeed, been subjects of much controversy in the Christian
church; and the several dissentients, that have hitherto published their
opinions, might long ago have approached much nearer to an agreement in the
happy medium of truth, had they been endued with sufficient impartiality; but
this, alas! has been too much wanting on every side of the controversy. The
episcopalians, on the one hand, though they have, in general, well maintained
and proved the nature and efficacy of the episcopal function, and the exercise
of it in every age of the church, clearly distinct from the office of mere
presbyters, (demonstrating that, though every bishop must be a presbyter, yet
that every presbyter most certainly was not a bishop,) nevertheless, on the
point of episcopal elections, they have either been totally silent like the
learned Archbishop Usher Archbishop Usher, however, in another useful work, not
professedly on the subject of Episcopacy, has nevertheless, in occasional
notes, produced several instances of Bishops elected by the PEOPLE as well as
by the clergy. See Veterum Epistolarum Hibernicarum Sylloge, viz. the 25th,
33d, 34th, 40th, and 41st, epistles, with the Archbishop's remarks upon them,
together with his remarks on the 39th epistle; all which remarks will be found
at the end of the book, under the title of "Epistolarum Recensio." The examples
relate to the free elections, by the clergy and people, of the Bishops of
Dublin and Waterford, between the years of Christ 1074 and 1122, which Bishops,
as well as the Bishops of Limerick, received, in those times, their episcopal
ordination, or consecration, from the Archbishops of Canterbury, and freely
acknowledged the jurisdiction of that see. The inhabitants of the said Irish
cities were colonies of Normans, who invaded Ireland and took possession of
those parts under the command of Rollo and his two brothers, (according to an
account cited by Archbishop Usher, ibid. p. 163.) which was probably before his
conquest and settlement in a part of France, about A. D. 912. Dublin, however,
and the greatest part of Ireland was afterward (viz. about A. D. 964.)
conquered by our Anglo-Saxon King, Edgar, (as appears by his charter, of that
year, "De Oswaldes law," ib. p. 121.) a circumstance not much noticed by
historians, as the Archbishop remarks on the said charter or diploma, p. 163.
"in quo" (says he) quod omnes historiae tacent, MAXIMAM PARTEM HIBERNIAE CUM
SUA NOBILISSIMA CIVITATE DUBLINIA, ANGLORUM REGNO SUBJUGATAM A SE FUISSE
confirmat. But though our Anglo-Saxon government soon afterward lost their
dominion in Ireland, with respect to temporal matters, yet these Norman
colonies in Ireland long afterward freely acknowledged and endeavored, of
their own accord, to maintain an ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the archbishops
of Canterbury over their own elected Bishops; by regularly applying to
Archbishop Lanfranck, and some of his successors, archbishops of Canterbury, to
consecrate their elected Bishops. And the elergy and people of Dublin, in one
of these epistles, (viz. to Radulph, Archbishop of Canterbury, A. D. 1121.)
say, " We have always willingly submitted OURS" (i. e. our Bishops) to the
GOVERNMENT OF YOUR PREDECESSORS, from which we remember that OURS received
ecclesiastical dignity. Antecessorum enim vestrorum magisterio semper NOSTROS
LIBENTER SUBDIMUS, a quo recordamur nostros accepisse dignitatem
ecclesiasticam. p. 100.
But, whether the submission of these Irish sees to the province of Canterbury
commenced only after the establishment of the Normans in England, is not
certain: though it is most probable that the custom might have been founded on
a more ancient connection of those cities with the province of Canterbury under
the Anglo-Saxon conquerors; especially as the burgesses and clergy of Dublin,
in their letter, dated A. D. 1121, last cited, assert that their voluntary
submission to that see had "been preserved a long time," multo tempore; for
they warn Sciatis vos revera, quod Episcopi Hiberniae maximum zelum erga nos
habent, et maxim ille Episcopus qui habitat Ardimachae; quia nos nolumus
obedire eorum ordinationi, sed semper sub vestro dominio esse volumus. Iccirco
vestra suffragia supplices petimus, quatenus Gregorium ad sacrum ordinem
Episcopatus promoveatis; si amplius illam parochiam, quam MULTO TEMPORE vobis
servavimus, retinere volueritis. Vale.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, that the Bishops of Ireland have great zeal (say
they, or wrath) against us, and chiefly the Bishop that dwells at Armagh,
because we are unwilling to obey their ordination, but we are always desirous
to be under your government, and therefore we request your suffrages, so far
that you may advance GREGORY (whom they call, in the former part of the epistle
NOSTRUM ELECTUM) to the sacred order of episcopacy, if you shall be willing,
any longer, to retain that see, which, for ALONG TIME, ("multo tempore,") we
have preserved to you Epist. 40. p. 100. The 25th epistle, An. 1074, is from
the clergy and people of the church of Dublin to Lanfranck, Metropolitan of
Canterbury; in the address of which, they tender their "debitam subjectionem".
See p. 68. Venerando sanctae Cantuariensis ecclesiae metropolitano Lanfranco,
clerus et populus ecclesiae Dublinensis debitam subjectionem.

Vestrae Paternitati est cognitum; quod ecclesia Dublinensis (quae Hiberniae
insulae metropolis est) suo sit viduata pastore, ac destituta rectore.
Propt^rea eligimus Presbyterum, nomine Patricium, nobis sufficientissime
cognitum, natalibus et moribus nobilem, Apostolica and Ecclesiastica cisciplina
imbutum, fide Catholicum, in scripturarum sensibus cautum, in dogmatibus
ecclesiasticis exercitatum. Quem nobis quantocius petimus ordinari episcopum:
quatenus, auctore Deo, regulariter nobis praeesse valeat et prodesse; et nos
sub ejus regimine salubriter militare possumus. Quia integritas praesidentium
salus est subditorum: et ubi est incolumitas obedientiae, ibi sana est forma
doctrinae.


They inform him that the church of Dublin is widowed of its Pastor, and
destitute of a Ruler, therefore WE (say the clergy and people) HAVE ELECTED A
PRESBYTER, by name, PATRICK, to us very sufficiently known, noble in birth and
morals, etc. whom we request, as soon as may be, to be ordained our bishop, etc.

The 33d epistle, A.C. 1095, p. 89. is from Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury,
to the Bishops of Ireland, informing them, that, on the death of his
predecessor, Archbishop Lanfranc, the King, the Bishops, and the great men, of
the kingdom had dragged him violently to the episcopal chair, the clergy and
people calling out for the same purpose -- Defuncto beatae memoriae
praedecessore meo Lanfranco Archiepiscopo, cum in Normannia Beccensis
monasterii abbas extitissem, (unde et praefatus antecessor meus ad regendam
ecclesiam, cui Deo auctore praesi^eo, ante me processerat,) occulto Dei
judicio, pro utilitatibus ecclesiasticis in Angliam veni. Quo venientem tam Rex
quam pontifices regnique optimates, adcathedram pontisicalem, non vocando, non
rogando, (ut fieri assolet,) immo violenter rapiendo pertrahunt: clero et
populo acclamantibus in id ipsum; ut nec unus cui quod gerebatur displiceret,
visus fuerit interesse. (p. 90.)
. This seems to have been an election by the parliament, like many other
examples about that time, viz. by the King, the Bishops, the Lords of the
kingdom, the clergy, and people; and, therefore, though it affords evidence of
the popular right to elect, yet it is not a proper example for imitation in
episcopal elections, which should be made only by the clergy and people of each
particular diocese, according to the ancient canons and practice of the
primitive church.

The 34th epistle, A. C. 1099, p. 92, is from the clergy and people of the town
of Waterford, with King Murchertag and Bishop Donald, to Archbishop Anselm,
wherein they say -- Nos et Rex noster Murchertachus, et Episcopus Domnaldus, et
Dermeth Dux noster, frater Regis, ELEGIMUS HUNC PRESBYTERUM Malchum, Walchelini
Wintoniensis episcopi monachum, nobis sufficientissime cognitum, etc. etc. Hunc
nobis petimus a vestr^ paternitate ordinari pontificem: quatenus regulariter
nobis praeesse valeat et prodesse, et nos sub ejus regimine salubriter Domino
militare possimus, etc.
, We and our King Murchertach, and Bishop Donald, and Dermeth, our Duke,
brother of the King, have ELECTED THIS PRESBYTER, MALCHUS, the monk of
Walchelin, Bishop of Winchester, to us very sufficiently known, etc. him we
request to be ordained our Bishop by your paternity, etc.

The 41st epistle (in p. 101.) is from Henry I. K. of England, to Radulph,
Archbishop of Canterbury, as follows Henricus, Rex Angliae, Radulpho
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo salutem.

Mandavit mini Rex Hiberniae per breve suum, et Burgenses Dublinae, quod
elegerunt hunc Gregorium in episcopum, et eum tibi mittunt consecrandum. Unde
tibi mando, ut, petitioni eorum satisfaciens, ejus consecrationem sine
dilatione expleas. Test Ranulpho Cancellario apud Windelsor, p. 101.


, the King of IRELAND has informed me by his brief, and the Burgesses of
DUBLIN, that THEY HAVE ELECTED this GREGORY, [who was probably the bearer of
the King's letter, as well as of the former (No. 40.) from the burgesses and
clergy of Dublin,] and send him to thee to be consecrated, wherefore I command
thee, that, satisfying their petition, thou may complete his consecration
without delay. At Windsor, witness, Ranulph, Chancellor.

Thus it appears that the conquest of Ireland by King Edgar did not affect the
just liberties of the church of Ireland; for the Norman colonies therein still
enjoyed the uninfluenced election of their own Bishops: and though they
acknowledged the jurisdiction of the province of Canterbury in ecclesiastical
matters, even when they were become independent, and separated from us, under a
King of their own, yet that submission was perfectly voluntary and free, and
was continued for no other reason than because they had originally received
episcopal ordination from the Archbishops of that see. Nevertheless they
declared themselves at liberty to receive consecration from the Archbishop of
Armagh, and other Irish Bishops, (who earnestly desired to confer it on them.)
in case the prelates of Canterbury should be negligent in their
superintendency. And the Bishops also of the native Irish and their flocks were
equally free and independent in ecclesiastical matters, having preserved a due
succession of the sacred order of episcopacy from the early times of their
first conversion ( before the time of the first Patrick) down to the barbarous
times of our K. Henry II. who invaded their island, under the delusive sanction
of a papal commission, to compel the submission of the church of Ireland to the
jurisdiction and doctrines of the church of Rome, and to pay an annual tribute
to the pope of one penny for every house; and all this on the delusive pretense
of instructing the Irish, reforming their manners, etc. Henry obtained his
first commission for these purposes from pope Adrian IV. A. D. 1155, which
Archbishop Usher has inserted in his said collection of ancient epistles, p.
109. And he informs us, in p. 152. (from Trivettus,) that Henry treated with
his parliament at Winchester concerning the conquest of Ireland, but, because
it did not please his mother the empress, that expedition was postponed to
another time. The empress, probably, was shocked with the injustice of the
proposal, notwithstanding the popish dispensation for it.

Afterward, however, in the year 1172, Pope Alexander III. revived the former
wicked and presumptuous grant of Adrian, for invading and usurping the temporal
rights as well as spiritual jurisdiction of the clergy and people of Ireland,
(whereby " the dominion of the Irish kingdom was INDULGED to" Henry,) and, in
the plenitude of his unlimited and unlawful power, this man of sin, (...),
presumptuously ratified and confirmed " -- Concessionem ejusdem" (i. e. Adriani
Papae) super Hibernici regni dominio vobitindulto (falva beato Petro et
sacrosanctae ROMANAE ecclesiae, sicut in ANGLIA, sic et in HIBERNIA, de
singul^s domibus annua unius denarii pensione) ratam habemus et confirmamus,
etc. p. 111.
the iniquity! The usurping Popes may therefore most justly be deemed the most
cruel enemies and destroyers of the temporal as well as ecclesiastical RIGHTS
of the people of Ireland; yet, so great was the darkness occasioned by the
future papal jurisdiction therein, that the mist is not yet entirely dispelled,
so that multitudes of well-meaning Irish people cannot yet perceive that the
corrupted and usurping church of Rome ought to be ranked amongst the most
inveterate and dangerous enemies of the church of Ireland.


, in his excellent little tract, De episcoporum et metropolitanorum origin,
and Dr. Cave, in his learned and laborious Dissertation concerning the
government of the ANCIENT CHURCH by Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs,) or
else have expressed a great degree of prejudice against all ancient
testimonies, which tend to justify any claim of popular or congregational right
in the choice of Bishops; and zealously opposing thereto a multitude of
precedents, wherein the imperial or royal power has been exercised in the
appointment of Bishops, and, like the indiscriminate Herecourt before quoted,
not discerning that the latter are precedents only of usurpation, not of right!
Those of the opposite party, the presbyterians, (who attribute the dignity and
function of Bishops to their Presbyters The learned author of An Enquiry into
the Constitution, Discipline, Unity, and Worship, of the Primitive Church, etc.
(a work commonly attributed to the late lord-chancellor King,) has labored
hard to level the primitive Bishops to the degree of mere Rectors of parishes,
and to elevate the Presbyters to the rank of Bishops, though there are clear
proofs of the superiority of Bishops (and of the ordinary residence, in each
place, but of one Bishop, with several Presbyters and Deacons at the same time)
included even in some of the citations which he has collected to favor a
contrary doctrine. His opinion seems to have been built principally on a
peculiar explanation of the word ordination. "That ordination," (says he,) that
I shall speak of, is this, the grant of a peculiar commission and power, which
remains indelible in the person to whom it is committed, and can never be
obliterated or rased out, except the person himself cause it by his heresy,
apostasy, or most extremely gross and scandalous impiety. (Thus far there is no
need to oppose his sense of ordination; but he adds,) "Now this sort of
ordination" (says he) was conferred only upon Deacons and Presbyters, or on
Deacons and Bishops, Presbyters and Bishops being here to be considered as all
one, as Ministers of the church universal, p. 115. This appears to be the
key-stone, whereby the whole fabric of the doctrine throughout his work is
suspended and held up, and consequently, the whole building must fall by the
removal of it! Very happily, for the determination of the dispute, he has
produced (within a few pages after the place from whence this quotation was
taken) some clear and unquestionable examples of the ordination of some persons
to the degree of Presbyters, who really were not Bishops, and never had
episcopal dignity in the ordinary ecclesiastical sense of the word episcopal,
so that they could not, consistently with truth, "be considered as all one"
with Bishops, according to this learned writer's hypothesis.

He cites (in p. 133.) the express testimony of Eusebius for the ordination of
ORIGIN to be a Presbyter, that the Bishops of Caesarea and Jerusalem ordained
(or laid hands upon) "him into the presbytery," i. e. to make him a Presbyter,
(...), Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 8. p. 209. Here then is a clear proof of the
ordination of a person to be a Presbyter, by the hands of Bishops, and yet no
man, that has any regard to the testimony and truth of ecclesiastical history,
will presume to say that Origin was a Bishop, though he was unquestionably
ordained to be a Presbyter; and, consequently, it cannot be true, that the
ordination of " Presbyters and Bishops" is "to be considered as all one."

By another quotation, in p. 135, from Eusebius, this learned writer proves
also that Novatian was ordained a PRESBYTER by imposition of hands, i.e. the
hands of a BISHOP, as Eusebius declares: (...). Cornel. apud Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 43. p. 245.

And that this is a clear example of the ordination of a mere Presbyter,
manifestly distinct from ordination to the episcopal dignity, is demonstrated
by the same chapter of Eusebius, which relates the wicked fraud of this same
Presbyter, Novatian, at a time when he was already a Presbyter, to obtain a
farther ordination for the episcopal dignity, by inveigling three simple
country Bishops to ordain him a Bishop by the imposition of their hands. And
therefore, though all Bishops are certainly Presbyters, yet these examples,
cited by the learned writer, clearly demonstrate that all Presbyters are NOT
Bishops, and, consequently, that their ordination is NOT to be considered as
all one. The rite of ordination (i. e. the laying on of hands by the Bishops,
after solemn prayer of the whole congregation for the assistance of the Holy
Spirit) is, indeed, "all one," as well in the ordaining of Deacons, as in the
ordination of Presbyters, and in the consecration of Bishops, differing only in
the designation to these respective offices of the Christian Ministry, as I
have already remarked in p. 316 n; but then this single circumstance of
designation is sufficiently effectual to occasion an essential difference in
the three degrees of holy orders; for what are orders but designations, or
declarations of the office conferred, or function to be discharged? insomuch
that a person who has been duly ordained by the same solemn rite, with a
designation to the office of a Deacon, may not assume the office of a
Presbyter, without a repetition of that rite, and an express order, or
designation, to the office and duty of a Presbyter; and a Presbyter, who has
twice received holy orders by the same solemn rite, cannot lawfully assume the
dignity and office of a Bishop, until he has been first duly elected to be a
Bishop; and, secondly, (which is the most essential circumstance, by which
episcopal authority is really conferred,) until he have been once more ordered,
or ordained, (notwithstanding his two former orders, as a Deacon, and as a
Presbyter,) and that with a repetition of the same solemn rite, (the laying on
of hands with previous prayer,) but differing in this, that there is always an
express order, or designation, to the episcopal function, previous to the
prayers and laying on of hands. The example of Novatian, cited above, shows
that the reordination of Presbyters, in order to obtain the degree and
function of a Bishop, was deemed necessary, even early in the third century.
Other examples, which I have quoted in pages 340-342 n. concerning the
reordination of Presbyters that had been elected to be Bishops, prove that the
same opinion as well as practice was preserved in the middle centuries of
Christianity; and the present universal practice of the episcopal church, in
giving priests orders always previous to episcopal consecration, is too well
known and established, to need the citation of particular examples for
illustration.

The learned Chancellor (if he was the writer of the said book) has also
supposed, that the petition of a candidate for holy orders was to the whole
Presbytery, because (says he, p. 115.) a Bishop alone could not give those holy
orders, as is most evident (says he) from Cyprian, who assures us, that all
clerical ordinations were performed by the common counsel of the whole
Presbytery; and, therefore, (says he,) when, upon a most urgent and necessary
occasion, he had been forced to ordain one but a Lector, without the advice and
consent of his Presbytery, which, one would be apt to think, was no great
usurpation, he takes great pains to justify and excuse himself for so doing.
But all this supposition falls, at once, to the ground, as soon as the
authority, which he has cited for it, (Cyprian's 24th Epist.) is more carefully
examined; for it really contains no such doctrine, and does not at all relate
to "clerical ordinations," which he has too hastily supposed; Cyprian had not
given "holy orders" (the subject of the learned writer's argument) to the
persons for whose appointment he thought it necessary to apologize in that
epistle; for they were still "sub clero," as he expressly declares, under the
degree of clergy; so that the apology could not be for having ordained any one
in the ecclesiastical sense of that word; but only for having MADE (or
appointed) one man a Lector, or Reader, in the church, and for having MADE
another man a Subdeacon. FECISSE me autem sciatis LECTOREM Saturum, et
HYPODIACONUM Optatum confessorem. These were mere local functions in the
church, at the disposal, not only of the Presbyters and Deacons, but also of
the laity, or whole congregation, who have a right to elect to such offices, in
many places, even to this day; so that an apology was really necessary in this
case, for having acted without their consent; but no apology would have been
due, had the case been a mere ordination, or conferring of holy orders. The
example is entirely foreign to the question of presbyters having a right to
confer holy orders; and, as a proof that it is so, be pleased to remark, that
the apology is addressed jointly to the Presbyters and Deacons; and cannot,
therefore, prove the right of the former to confer holy orders, without
admitting, also, the latter to the same degree of authority, an idea which the
learned writer never intended to promote.

Cyprian has been as much misunderstood by some former advocates for the
Presbyterian pretensions to the right of ordaining; who to prove that
ordination by Bishops, without the assistance of PRESBYTERS, was always
forbidden and opposed, tell us (says Dr. Hammond) of Aurelius's being ordained
by Cyprian, and his colleagues, ep. 33. and then assure us, from ep. 58. that,
by his colleagues, he means his Presbyters, (where yet there is no other proof
of it, but the using of these words in the inscription of the epistie,
Cyprianus cum collegis, et ego et collegae, Cyprian with his colleagues, and I
and my colleagues.) This (says Dr. Hammond) is a great, but discernible,
fallacy, put upon the reader, as will soon appear, 1. if we but observe that
the 33d epistle, where he tells of Aurelius, was written by Cyprian to his
Presbyters, and so THEY ARE the persons whom he advertiseth, what he and his
colleagues had done, and so, sure, WERE NOT those colleagues that did it with
him. Or, secondly, if, for the understanding Cyprian's notion of colleagues, ep.
58. we shall but look forward to the next epistle, 59, for that will fully
discover it, being this, Cyprianus et caeteri collegae qui in concilio
affuerunt numero LXVI. where Cyprian's colleagues are evidently the 66 Bishops
that were in council with him. And so St. Austin, in his 28th epistle to St.
Hierome, mentioning this very epistle, says, Cyprianus cum Coepiscopis suis,
Cyprian with his fellow Bishops; an irrefragable evidence that these his
colleagues were Bishops. The like (says he) might be also observed of the
testimony out of Firmilian, which they there subjoin, of the Seniores and
Praepositi that have power of ordaining, by whom, say they, the presbyters, as
well as the Bishops, are understood; but, again, it is clear, by the express
words of the epistle, that by them are meant the Bishops in their annual
council; necessario apud nos fit ut, per SINGULOS ANNOS, SENIORES et PRAEPOSITI
in unum conveniamus, etc.

I should not have made so long a quotation from Dr. Hammond, had not the
learned Chancellor (or author of the tract just before cited) once more held
forth these very testimonies to justify ordination by Presbyters, though they
had long before been so amply confuted by Dr. Hammond.

"It is a sad mistake" (says the rev. Mr. Tho Sa^mon, in his Historical
Collections relating to the Originals, etc. of the Inhabitants of Great
Britain, p. 445-449.) of those who have a prejudice against episcopacy, that it
is an invention of the Popish times, and that our Reformers so modelled the
constitutions of our church, as they might be most agreeable to the humor of
the Romanists. But, certainly, the history of Britain may convince any man of
the contrary. The Popish times did not begin at the council of Arles, yet there
we had our Bishops: The fathers of the council of Nice had spent their days
under the severest persecutions of the heathen, and were just entered upon the
morning of the christian empire, and shall we think that popery was then
prevalent? Our church is now settled as it was at that time: Not only Bishops
all over Britain, so far as it was christian, but very near the same number of
Bishops. The three chief bishoprics were settled at three most distant and
proper places to have jurisdiction over the rest, London, York, and Caerleon:
There were in all 28 cities, and accordingly 28 bishoprics, as the number is
given us both by Gildas and Bid; and, if we have now two less, yet so much of
Britain as lies between Berwick and Edinburgh, now belonging to Scotland, may
well be allowed for the making of two. At the council of Nice, the jurisdiction
of their metropolitans was settled, and the union of all the Bishops of the
Province provided for: Such was the order and harmony of the whole clergy,
that, though the diocese was so large that it could not be particularly known
and taught by the superior officers of the church, yet every one acting in his
place, and being accountable to those above him, there was no defect either in
the doctrine or discipline of those primitive times.

Certainly there is demonstration for episcopacy, in that there were not only
Bishops before popery, but when the popish missionaries set up in the world,
the old Bishops were the very men that made the opposition against them.
Nothing can be more undoubted in history, than that the British Bishops met
Austin and his companions at the famous oak upon the banks of Severn, and there
utterly broke with them, peremptorily refusing subjection to the pope of Rome,
It is also as certain that Colman, bishop of Lindisfarn, and his northern
clergy, who had their original Christianity from Britain, maintained the grand
dispute at Streanshale against Agelbert, Wilfrid, and the rest of the
Romanists; that they retired and forsook their preferments rather than they
would submit to the impositions of Rome. The laying aside their ancient
observations, and receiving the papal tonsure, were looked upon by them both as
innovations and badges of servitude to a foreign power, and therefore rejected
by them, as they are by us at this day. We must maintain, like them, the
customs of the church, which have been from the beginning; there always was a
commemoration of Christ and his apostles at certain times, which we also
observe without any he or she saints of the Roman make: There always was a
submission to the authority of the church in matters of decency and order,
which is all that we require, without the least subjection to the church of
Rome: We yield no deference, we utterly renounce her authority over us. And, to
suppose that our reformers either wanted judgment to distinguish between the
ancient customs of the church and the later inventions of popery, or that they
wanted integrity to the true christian religion, whose works and martyrdom bear
witness in their favor, is such a pretense as cannot support itself under a
sincere consideration.

We should be fond of episcopacy, if we did but review that opposition which
the pope always made against it; if we did but observe how he could never
compass his ends but by the destruction of its power. He raised up the several
orders of monks, that those who were employed in religion might depend upon
him, and not upon their Bishops; he exempted the monasteries from the
jurisdiction of the diocesans, that all those rich plantations might heartily
espouse the tyranny and superstition of Rome. He did all he could to transform
the bishops into monks, and prevailed so far, that every archbishop of
Canterbury thought it necessary to put on that habit; which made his episcopacy
subservient to another sort of government. He found that a diocesan Bishop,
with his clergy in a cathedral church, was such a bulwark to the national
establishment, that he could not dilate his empire; he therefore, by his
interest with King Egbert, got the great Oswald law to pass, by which the
Presbyters were cast out, and monks put into their places. How can episcopacy
be a popish invention, when it has been all along the great business of the
pope to overthrow it?

We must ever own great honor and reverence due to Columba, who planted his
monastery or university in the isle of Hye, upon the coasts of Scotland, which
was a seminary for all the christian ministers of the north; but that the
custom or education of this place should be against episcopacy is impossible,
since they not only had a Bishop in that little island, but Adamnanus, one of
the successors of Columba, gives us an account of the great deference they
always paid to that order. Bishop Aidan came from thence, converted the
Northumbrians, had his episcopal see in the island of Lindisfarn, which was
afterward removed to Durham. After he was dead, Bishop Finan was ordained by
the Scots, and succeeded him; by Finan was Diuma, the first Bishop of
Litchfield, ordained, whose successors were also from Scotland, and of the
episcopal order. We meet also Colman from Scotland, that Bishop of the
Northumbrians, who was ejected for the protestant cause. If Columba himself had
such an affection of the monastic life, that he would not stir from Hye, and
was of so great authority that it was thought fit the Bishops of the north
should be accountable to him and his successors, to whom so much was committed
of the royal power, this can be no argument against episcopacy itself; since it
is declared, at the same time, that such a submission of Bishops to an abbot
was a perverting that order which was established in the church. Those who read
only the account of Scotland in the last century, may, perhaps, have an opinion
that there was an ancient of Presbyterian government there; but all authentic
histories testify that they had the same constitution of ecclesiastical orders,
which were in the rest of Britain, and all other christian nations.


, and also more particularly the Independents, who, together with them, contend
for the congregational or popular right to ELECT, are apt to lay too much
stress (perhaps) on this external circumstance of FREE ELECTION; for they
generally consider it as essential to the sacerdotal function; whereas, in
fact, it is only expedient and desirable, but not absolutely necessary, being,
indeed, the most prudent mode of introduction to the constituting rite of
consecration, but no part of the rite itself, which consists only of solemn
prayer, with the laying on of hands; in which latter, the laity can have no
pretense to interfere We may safely acknowledge, without injury to our
election-rights, that the Bishops of the primitive church who succeeded
immediately after the apostles, were not generally elected by the people, but
were appointed either by the apostles themselves, as I have before remarked, or
by apostolic men, for which see the evidence of Tertullian, p. 243. Ceterum, si
quae audent interserere se aetati apostolicae; ut ideo videantur ab apostolis
traditae, quia sub apostolis fuerunt, possumus dicere: edant ergo origines
ecclesiarum suarum: evolvant erdinem episcoporum suorum, ita per successiones
ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille EPISCOPUS aliquem ex APOSTOLIS, vel
APOSTOLICIS VIRIS, qui tamen cum apostolis perseveraverit, habuerit auctorem et
antecessorem. Hoe enim modo ecclesiae apostolicae census suos deferunt: sicut
Smyrnaeorum ecclesia Polycarpum ab Joanne conlocatum refert: sicut Romanorum,
Clementem a Petro ordinatum itidem: perinde utique et ceterae exhibent quos ab
Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos apostolici seminis traduces habeant.
Confingant tale aliquid haeretici. Quid enim illis post blasphemiam inlicitum
est? sed etsi confinxerint, nihil promovebunt. Ipsa enim doctrina eorum cum
apostolica comparata, ex diversitate et contrarietate sua pronunciabit, neque
apostoli alicujus auctoris esse, neque apostolici: quia sicut apostoli non
diversa inter se docuissent, ita et apostolici non contraria apostolis
edidissent. Nisi illi qui ab apostolis didicerunt, aliter praedicaverunt. Ad
hanc itaque formam probabuntur ab illis ecclesiis, quae licet nullum ex
apostolis, vel apostolicis, auctorem suum proferant, ut multo posteriores, quae
denique quotidie instituuntur: tamen in eadem side conspirantes, non minus
Apostolicae deputantur, pro consanguinitate doctrinae, etc. p. 243. Paris edit.
1641.
. But this primitive rite of the church, the laying on of hands, is publicly
rejected by many of the Independent and Socinian ministers. The ceremony of THE
IMPOSITION OF HANDS (says one of them, for instance, in reporting the character
of an eminent Socinian Preacher) he also refused to submit to, because he
considered it as void of any just meaning, where no extraordinary gifts are, or
can be, imparted. This opinion of the imposition of hands, must have been too
hastily taken up, because it is certainly erroneous. The fact is, that this
ceremony, like all other outward rites, that were instituted by Christ, or his
Apostles, may, or may not, be efficacious, according to the inward disposition,
or sincerity, of the person to whom the outward rite is administered.

Neither the administration of baptism, nor the participation of the Lord's
Supper, can impart any good effect on those who receive them unworthily,
without sincerity, without regard to the internal and spiritual GOD is a
SPIRIT, and they that worship him, must worship him IN SPIRIT and in truth.
John iv. 24.

There is nothing in this text which can fairly be construed against the use of
external ceremonies, either of the laying on of hands, or of the sacramental
institutions of Christ, though it is certainly applicable to enforce the
necessity of a sincere and spiritual devotion in the use of them, as also in
our daily prayers: but those men, who not only despise these institutions of
Christ and his primitive church, but even neglect, for the most part, in their
public meetings, Christ's positive injunctions TO PRAY (" Ask and it shall be
given to you, etc. Mat. vii. 7.) and neglect more especially TO PRAY for the
HOLY SPIRIT, (which is so clearly promised to them that ask, Luke xi. 9-13.)
through a groundless persuasion that they do obtain that heavenly gift by other
means; those men, I fear, are under a very dangerous delusion of a contrary
spirit; for it would be unreasonable to admit their pretensions to spiritual
worship in the sense of that text of John, (viz. in spirit and in truth,)
whilst they prefer their own novel way of worship to that true worship which
was so clearly commanded by Christ, and practiced by the primitive Christians,
and the universal church.


signification; but merely to please men by an outward conformity to the
ceremonies for some worldly advantage, or favor, as many do by way of test: to
such men "no extraordinary gifts are, or can be, imparted" by these outward
rites, which, on the contrary, rather increase their condemnation. For though
very worthy ministers, who officiate therein, or administer these outward
rites, may be deceived by the outward deportment of the persons to be baptized,
or communicating, yet God's Holy Spirit is not to be mocked, as we learn by the
sad example of Ananias and Saphira, whose dissimulation was punished by an
immediate stroke from God, to impress the infant church with a due sense of the
Almighty Power, and the necessity of sincerity in all things pertaining to
God's Service. Such extraordinary outward manifestations of God's Spirit are
not now to be expected; it is sufficient that they continued until authentic
historical accounts of our holy religion were dispersed, in writing, throughout
the greatest part of the known world, and the canon of the sacred Scriptures
completed, in which ample accounts of them are related; so that we may say of
the New Testament, as our Lord said of the Old Testament, adding, to the
necessity of believing Moses and the Prophets, the necessary belief, also, of
the New Testament, that the men who believe not these additional testimonies,
of Christ's Disciples and witnesses, would not believe, even if one should rise
from the dead! Thus it appears, that the extraordinary outward manifestations
of God's Spirit, in working miracles, are no longer necessary for the
edification of the church; but we must not, therefore, say that no
extraordinary gifts are, or can be, imparted! For miracles are not the only
test of the real inspiration of God's Holy Spirit, but love, good works, and
holding fast the faith, which was once delivered to the Saints: These are the
fruits by which we are to judge of the tree; and, without these, even miracles
are to be suspected of delusion, and are to be esteemed rather as the lying
wonders of Satan than as the works of God! The power of working miracles,
therefore, is not such an "extraordinary gift," as we have any right to look
for, or to expect under the present dispensation of the christian religion; and
yet the gift of God's spirit (which every true Christian has a right to expect,
according to the unquestionable promises of Christ) is certainly "an
extraordinary gift," and is as certainly "imparted" to all that duly ask it in
the meritorious name of our Redeemer, if we may confide in the truth of the
holy Scriptures! It is always "an extraordinary gift," (though imparted
according to the ordinary dispensation of our religion,) because it supports
and endows pious and worthy men, on many occasions, far beyond their ordinary,
or natural, abilities and strength. It is, I say, a real addition to the
ordinary nature of man, and therefore always an extraordinary gift; being
nothing less than a real participation of the DIVINE NATURE, of which we may,
if we will, be partakers ((...)) through the exceeding great and precious
promises of that divine person that has called us to glory and virtue. See 2
Pet. i. 3, 4.

If men are thus assured that this extraordinary gift may be obtained by
asking, according to Christ's directions, they surely cannot doubt of its being
imparted when they ask it in a more particular manner on great and solemn
occasions, as at the baptism of adults, or the confirmation of persons that
have been baptized in their infancy; and at the sacramental commemoration of
Christ's death, according to our Lord's own institution: these outward rites
cannot impart the extraordinary gift; but the goodness and truth of God are
absolutely pledged (if I may use such an expression) to fulfill the exceeding
great and precious promises in favor of prayer for that extraordinary gift:
and such prayer (having this the object) does always make a part of those
solemn rites; whereby they are most certainly rendered efficacious, if
sincerity be not wanting in those persons to whom they are administered.

And it is exactly the same thing with respect to "the imposition of hands,"
(either in the consecration of Bishops, or in the ordination of Priests and of
Deacons,) because that ancient rite of Christ's church is always performed with
solemn prayer, in Christ's name, for the Holy Spirit to guide and assist the
persons consecrated or ordained; and the prayers of the congregation are also
desired on their behalf; and therefore, if the persons elected to be
consecrated for the office and dignity of Bishops, and the candidates for
Priests, or Deacons orders, are really sincere themselves in their prayers and
undertakings, there is no doubt but the laying on of hands, thus accompanied
with suitable prayer and devotion, is truly efficacious, and does impart the
extraordinary gift abovementioned. For the action of "laying on hands" has
nothing in it indecent, immoral, or contrary to God's laws, such as might be
supposed to hinder the good effect of Christ's absolute promises to them that
ask; but, on the contrary, is authenticated and sanctified by apostolic usage,
declared in canonical Scripture, as well as by the constant subsequent practice
of all the primitive churches of Christ; and ought not, therefore, to be laid
aside on the groundless pretense that no extraordinary gifts are, or can be,
imparted.

GRANVILLE SHARP.
Old Jewry, Oct. 1784.
A very worthy member of parliament, having lately read as much of this tract
as was then printed, was pleased to propose the following queries; in answer to
which the following letter was sent to him by the author, viz.
How could we divide this and other great towns into tithings?

Would not streets be a better division in cities? Parishes and streets,
instead of tithings and hundreds?


ANSWER.
Dear SIR,
THE ancient mode of dividing great cities was by wards; each of which was
governed by an alderman, the ealdorman of the Anglo-Saxons, an officer of great
authority in the common law; being a JUSTICIARY, and having all the powers of
our modern justices of the peace; and, what is more, was always elected by the
housekeepers or deciners of the ward over which he presides. This ancient mode
of division by no means interferes with the lesser divisions of tithings and
hundreds; so far from it, that the government of the wards is not complete
without them. The Lord Mayor's precept, to the aldermen, orders them (to this
day) to hold courts of frankpledge See Bohun's Privilegia Londini, p. 386.
under the head of Wardmote Courts and the Lord Mayor's annual Precept to hold
them; which latter, amongst other things, contains the following article. --
No. 11. And, for that, of late, there is more resort to the city of persons
evil affected in religion, and otherwise, than in former times has been; you
shall diligently inquire if any man be received to dwell or abide within your
Ward, that is not put under FRANKPLEDGE, as he ought to be by the custom of the
city: etc.
; which were not without the regular divisions of tithings to give them effect.
The wards are local divisions of various magnitude, and have been formed, (as
you suggest,) some by streets, some by the intersection of brooks, now covered
over; but those various dimensions of space required a regular numerical
division of the housekeepers, in order to ascertain the due proportion of the
representatives in the common council of the city.

The average-rate of common-councilmen to the housekeepers, or deciners, is, at
present, about one to 90. And as the city was, in ancient times, more populous,
and the houses smaller for each family, when men were restrained by law from
building in the environs of the city, it is probable that the true proportion
of housekeepers, to elect one common-councilman, should be 100; so that the
common council has formerly been an assembly of hundreders or high constables.
As the gates of the city have been removed so as to leave this most important
place entirely exposed to the fatal consequences of any sudden riot, the
attacks of any hardened banditti, and (especially in cases of any alarms by
fire,) to the most dangerous confluence of multitudes of unknown people, many
of whom plunder the distressed, and others hinder the necessary means of
assistance, it is highly expedient that some means of defense should be
devised. I have been told, that, in the great cities of Japan, the streets are
barricadoed and shut up with palisade gates every night, and that the people
are actually divided into tithings and hundreds. I have much to say on this
subject; and, if you are not going out of town immediately, I will do myself
the honor to wait on you and communicate my thoughts.

I remain, with great esteem, Dear SIR, Your most humble Servant, GRANVILLE
SHARP.
Old Jewry, Aug. 21, 1784.
* * * *, Esquire.

