CRITICAL REFLECTIONS UPON THE EMMENOLOGY OF Dr. FRIEND.

BY Dr. LE TELLIER, a French Physician.

Translated from the FRENCH.

LONDON: ^rinted and Sold by J. WATSON, over against Hungerford-Market in the
Strand, and by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1731.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

PREFACE.
THE best Preface, in my Mind, that can be made to this Book is, a Quotation
out of itself, p. 59. where the Author, as in a Sort of Corollary, drawn from
his own Reflections, says:

"From the Reflections that have been hitherto made, it may be gathered, that
it is by no Means, an indifferent Matter in Practice, to adopt indifferently,
the System of the Rupture of the Vessels, or that of the Intrusion of the Blood
into the lymphatick Canals: It is of the highest Consequence, to choose either
the one or the other, to list on one Side or the other, and to appear more than
ordinarily engaged or concerned therein. If the Dispute here was only about
some insipid, barren Point of Speculation, amusing perhaps to the Curious, but
altogether useless, and without Influence on Practice, those who regard Things
only as they are useful, might perhaps slumber over it: But as our Business is
here about a capital Point, which affects and concerns Practice to the highest
Degree; since in the two Hypotheses the Manner of Cure is quite different; this
ought to awake the Attention of all Practitioners, inspire them with an
extraordinary Relish for the present Subject, and rouse them totally out of
their Indifference."

And this should, indeed, rouse out of their Indifference, not only all
Gentlemen of the Faculty, but even, methinks, should tempt all Gentlemen, who
are (as all Gentlemen should be) Men of Learning, to study this Point, on
purpose to concern themselves in this Controversy, as it regards the Well-being
of the Fair Sex, the lovely Fountain whence, under Heaven, we all have our
Being; Women! to promote whose Health and Happiness, the Man that is not
ambitious, is a Monster! the Object of all Mankind's just Detestation!

CRITICAL REFLECTIONS.
WOMEN are subject to such regular Evacuations, that it is very hard to account
for, and assign the Cause thereof. Some have been of Opinion, that Nature, by
this Flux, proposed to purge the Blood of the Sex from the Impurities it
contracts, thereby to render them more fruitful. Others, by observing the
Qualities of the Blood which Women in Health ^ose in their Courses, have been
persuaded, that it is so far from being an Excrement, or Mass of Filth, that, on
the contrary, it is a most pure Blood, and of Consequence, very fit and proper
to nourish the Foetus. So much for the Final Cause, or End, for which these
Flowings seem ordained.

As for the Efficient Cause, the moving, or mechanic Principle, which, in the
Female Body produces these Effects, Men do not agree much better about this,
than about the Final Cause, and are not much less divided in their Opinions, as
to the Manner in which this Evacuation is made, than they are concerning the
End, the Motives and Design, which Nature may have in procuring it.

Some Authors, much devoted to Astroculture, and accustomed to trample under
Foot such immediate Causes as they have just at Hand, Objects that are too
plain, familiar, palpable, and natural for them to look upon but with Contempt,
as Things common, ordinary, trivial; these Men erect the Moon for the efficient
Cause, and make her absolute Mistress of the Courses in Question. Others,
somewhat more indulgent, and better disposed toward sublunary Causes, have
taken Care to make Cavities in the Womb, where they lodge in Ambuscade a
certain Ferment, or Leaven, which they have ordered to sally regularly thence
every Month, to attack the Blood in its Passage, put the Humors all in
Combustion, disturb the Harmony of the Motions, the Exactness of the Functions,
and, in fine, to play the little Devil, that, full of Malice, bent upon Mutiny,
and breathing naught but wild Sedition, is never at Rest, nor lays down his
Arms, till he has raised in the Blood a tumultuous Agitation, a disorderly
Effervescence, a more than ordinary Fermentation, and laid under Fire and Gore
all the Region of the Matrix, which he makes a Field of Battle, that is, for
some Days, to be quite overflown with Blood, and as the Object of his Rage, to
appear altogether dismal, and in Disorder. They who judge in the most simple,
and most natural Way, and, of course, the nearest to Truth, are those who,
after the famous Galen, acknowledge for Cause and Mover of this Flowing, the
Plethora, or Abundance of Blood, among whom, we must confess, that Dr. Friend,
an English Physician, has most distinguished himself, in a Treatise he has
published upon this Subject; which, though it be not exempt from Mistakes (as we
shall observe in the Sequel of this) is, however, in the main, a valuable
Piece, both for the singular Clearness that shines every where throughout the
Performance (which makes its principal Merit) and for the great Number of very
excellent Reasonings, and essential Observations, that we see there displayed
in the fairest Light. If one will but vouchsafe to stoop a little, to seek for
Causes in the sublunary Empire, and not to be over-smitten with the Charms of
the Moon, and dazzled with her mighty Power; in fine, if we'll be impartial
Judges, we shall easily side with Galen, and without Hesitation, give to the
System of the Plethora (which has since been so illustrated by Dr. Friend) the
Justice due to it, and the Preference it deserves.

Women, in their Courses, do but discharge their Superfluity; and, to be
convinced of this, it is enough to observe, that after they have had these
Flowings long enough, for Instance, the Space of Five Years, they are no ways
disordered thereby, but, on the contrary, they continue always alike, hold the
very same State, enjoy the same Vigor, and, if you weigh 'em, you will find 'em
no lighter; and yet, in this Time, they have lost a Hundred Pound of purest
Blood; as Loss! that should not only weaken them, but consume almost their
whole Substance, and reduce them to nothing, were it any thing else but
Superfluity. Now, if Women have this Redundancy of Blood, this is what we call
the Plethora, and the Matter we are seeking. There is therefore this Plethora,
or Redundancy of Blood in Women; that is proved: But how, and by what Means is
this Plethora contracted in the Persons of the Sex? This is what we now must
unfold in two or three Words; Women transpire less than Men; which is proved by
four Reflections: 1st. Their Bodies are more weak and tender; the Parts thereof
less robust; the Texture of the Fibers more fine and soft, and less proper for
oscillatory Motions; and, in fine, less vigorous; witness their gentle and
languishing Pulse; which shows us plain, that the peaceable Blood, moving easy
in ^ts Course, and slowly rolling through the drowsy Vessels, runs not rapidly
to the Glands, neither toward the Skin, nor elsewhere; so that the Secretion
of the Humors cannot very much be promoted: Add to this, that the Juices,
separated in the Strainers, are not in Haste to issue; because the secreting
Pipes have not a systaltick Virtue strong enough to squeeze 'em through, and
drive 'em forth with Precipitation. ^dly. The Vessels in Women are of a
straiter Orifice. Now, as the Secretion of Humors is more or less abundant,
according ^s the Strainers are bigger or smaller, and the Blood more or less
animated, it follows of Course, that, the Motion of the Blood ^eing less strong
at the same time that the Pipes or Organs of Secretion are more ^treight in the
Woman, the Secretion of the Humors must be performed more slowly. 3dly. Women
are of a moist Temperament, as plainly appears by the Suppleness and Softness
of their Skin; now, if the Fibers are so soaked in Humidity, it is because they
^ave not Vigor enough to rid themselves of ^t; for that Body must be dry which
expels with Force the Juices that come into it, and discharges a great Part of
its Moisture ^y Transpiration, which is the more abun^ant in Proportion as the
Oscillation of ^he Vessels is the more vigorous. 4thly. The Fair Sex is not so
active, has not so much Exercise; they lead an idle, indolent, sedentary Life,
which does not much excite Transpiration: It Is true, we see some Women robust,
and engaged in hard Labor These, because they are as strong as Men and have a
manly Complexion and Character, are called Virago's; and such are exempted
from the usual Courses of Women We have also seen Women-Singers an^ Dancers
exempted from these. But here may be objected what Dr. Andry advance^ in his
excellent Thesis upon Exercise, tha^ Women's frequent Tattle may supply the Want
of other Bodily Labor; and, perhaps, hence it comes, that Women, chattering
much more than Men, have less Occasion for other Exercise. We must ow^ that
Transpiration is assisted by the Motion of the Voice in Conversation; yet these
Motions are not so considerable, as not to leave sufficient Matter for Women's
Courses. Thu^ is the Plethora bred in the Sex; whenc^ Nature is obliged to
prepare a Discharge for the superfluous Blood, whose Sally, for several
Reasons, is through the Womb; for this is the Part where the Blood more
plentifully issues, because of the great Number of Blood Vessels, which, being
wound and interwoven together, spread all over and through the Substance, in a
Thousand Warps and Turnings, after a serpentine Manner; and that which the more
conveys the Blood this Way, is the Trunk of the ^escending Aorta, which is
remarkably ^^rger in Women than in Men, to the End that, the Blood flowing more
abundantly ^ownwards, the Foetus may thereby be the ^etter nourished, and the
easier thrust out ^y the Muscles in Time of Childbirth. Now, as much
Propension as the Blood has (...) descend toward the Matrix, so much ^as it
the greater Difficulty to return from ^^ence; for thither it tends, through the
^rteries, which jirk it pretty fast along, ^^d the more readily, as the Blood
of itself, ^y its own Weight, concurs to the Motion: ^ut it returns through the
Veins, which have ^ot the like Force to shove it, besides the ^sisting Clog of
its own Weight, which ^^ey have to conquer; so that it is always (...) a
Disposition to recoil, suspended as it (...) in the Vessels which labor to
make it ^^se; and which, to increase the Difficul^^, have not so much as a
Place of Re^^rve, to sustain it in its March; and don't ^^pply it with Suckers
to facilitate its ^^inful Journey. For this also is a Point to (...) observed,
that the Veins of the Womb ^ave no Valves; so that the Blood has a ^eal of
Difficulty to gather in this Viscus; ^^d, of Consequence, has the like
Difficulty (...) pass through the Conduits that there ^^rminate. Here it is
that I am obliged to ^ffer in Opinion with Dr. Friend, about ^^e Manner of
explaining this Passage; he pretends, that, to make way for the Blood to
escape, the Arteries must break in their Extremities, that is, toward these
Parts where they take the Name of Capillaries; he undertakes to prove this
Rupture by Principles deduced from the Mathematics whence he draws Conclusions
for his Purpose and, in the Manner he goes about it, h^ seems to reason very
securely, and to advance nothing but what seems infallible an^ undoubted; and
his Argument has all the Air of a Demonstration, victorious and
unexceptionable. A Geometrician, who was t^ prove, that all the Angles of a
Triangle ar^ equal to two Right ones, and that the Tangent touches the Circle
but in on^ Point, would not go more boldly about i^ nor with more Confidence.
At the sam^ Time, the Doctor's Demonstration is fa^ from Geometrical; and the
Geometrica^ Certainty will, perhaps, be rather found (...) my Side. He advances
two Proposition established by Mathematicians: 1st. Th^^ the Force of a Body
increases, as it acquir^ either more Bulk, or more Swiftness, (...) both
together, 2dly. If the Force of the Body is superior to that of the Obstac^^
which it encounters, this Obstacle will (...) surmounted. Whence he concludes,
th^^ the Force of the Blood augments in the Plethora, because there is
together, (...) once, both more Bulk and more Velocity more Bulk, because the
Plethora consists abundance of Blood; more Velocity, because, says he, as there
is abundance of blood, provided it be not slow and viscous, ^t emits the
greater Quantity of Spirits, which flow to the Heart and the Arteries, ^he more
briskly to animate them, and ^edouble their Contractions. Now, the Vessels are
to be considered as Obstacles that ^inder the. Blood from extravasing; and ^uch
they continue to be, whilst they are ^uperior or equal in Force to the Blood
^hey contain within them; but, when they ^ome to be overpowered, and the
Strength ^f the Blood is increased to that Degree, ^s to conquer their
Resistance, they straight ^ield, are readily broken, and open a free ^assage
through the Breaches of their ^unicks. Now, the Vessels the easiest and ^^ttest
to yield, are those of the Womb; which, being the most attacked, are least ^ble
to make Resistance; and to compre^end perfectly well how they give way, one
^eeds only to take Notice, that the Ple^hora, at the same Time it augments the
^orce of the Blood, weakens the Resistance ^f the Vessels; for, says Dr.
Friend, in con^equence of the big Volume of Blood that ^eighs upon the Veins
and Arteries, not ^nly on their Sides, but perpendicular, because of the
winding Disposition of the ^essels, which, by their Turnings and
Counter-turnings, in their Folds and Re^olds, expose their Angles and Corners
to the direct and perpendicular Impulse of the Fluid: By Means, I say, of this
big Volume of Blood, the Vessels are stretched and dilated, and thereby the
Fibers that compose these Vessels leave an Opening betwixt 'em; so that their
Texture being less close and firm, and more pressed upon, they are more
disposed to separate, and yield to the Attack of the Blood, if it just so
happens, that when they are at their weakest, the Blood has more Force than
ordinary, as it truly has; since the Plethora gives it more Strength, as we
have proved, both by Reason of the Blood's greater Bulk and greater Velocity:
The Blood therefore will take the Advantage of the Vessels disadvantageous
Situation, which, being violently stretched, widen'd, and pressed, lose a^
great deal of their Resistance, and can offer but a weak Bar against the
impetuous Force and Impulse of the Blood. Wherefore, the Barrier being
surmounted, because the Fibers of the Vessels being widen'd, and but weakly
helping each other, nor able to make any great Struggle against their Disunion,
there is but little to hinder the Fluid from breaking its Prison, from tearing
their Canals, and extravasing; the more easily, as these winding Canals, that
make a Thousand Circumvolutions, are more exposed to the Strokes of the Blood,
being besides destitute of the Muscles and the Fat to uphold, maintain and
defend 'em against the Rupture: They must therefore yield to the Impulse of the
Blood, and be broken to give it way to escape.

This is the Explication of Dr. Friend, and one cannot help agreeing with him in
this Part of it, that the Plethora contributes much to the Monthly Courses; at
the same Time we must also own, that notwithstanding all these Advantages which
we have just now attributed to the Blood, yet it ought to be contained in a
just Measure, and restrained to certain Bounds. We must confess with Etmuller
and Riverius, that an excessive Plethora is more likely to suppress, than to
excite the Courses; nay, we may further assert, that this is the most usual,
and almost the general Cause of these Suppressions that afflict the Sex. The
two famous Physicians, we have just now quoted, account for these Suppressions
by the excessive Redundance of Blood, which they make the Cause thereof, much
in the same Manner as we impute the Stoppage of Urine to the too great Quantity
of Liquor gathered in the Bladder; which Anology is judicious enough; it is
true, it is not exact, it runs not upon all Four; because (according to the
Remark of Dr. Friend, who refutes it) the Bladder is much better furnished than
the Blood Vessels are, being fortified with a Tunick firm and fleshy, too
strong to be torn and broken by the Affluence of Urine, which coming there to
lodge but in a slow, indolent Manner, without any Impetuosity, is not able to
make any great Havoc there; all that it does in this Case, is so to stretch
the Fibers of the Bladder, that they cannot come to themselves again, and have
not Freedom enough to contract in order to expel the Urine. That which also
contributes a great deal to the Stoppage is, that the Sphincter of the Bladder,
to wit, the Muscle that stops the Passage thereof, has, in this Case, all the
Advantage, and remains Master of the Field of Battle, because its Antagonist,
namely, the Muscular Tunick, which serves to drive out the Urine, being
stretched, dilated, constrained and hindered, has not Strength enough to
counterbalance the Sphincter, much less to overpower it. In this respect, I
shall believe the Parallel betwixt the two Stoppages to be imperfect; but it is
just at least in this, that it compares a Blood, which issues not from the
Vessels, because, oppressing them by its Weight, it leaves them not Play enough
to expel it; I say, as it compares this Blood to the Urine that remains in the
Bladder, because being there too abundant, it so dilates the Bladder, that it
cannot contract to drive it out. On both Sides we see a super-abundant Fluid; a
Solid groaning under the Oppression of this Super-abundance; and on both Sides
is observed a Canal or Reservior, choked with its Liquor, which it is forced
to retain, because it is deprived of the Means to discharge it; inasmuch as
this ^iquor, by its excessive Quantity, triumphs ^ver the Spring of the moving
Fibers, which, by being more stretched, lose all ^^eir Power and Play.
Therefore our ^^o Authors Comparison is, in this Sense, ^ery just; and the
Reasons we shall allege (...) the Sequel will help to set off the Ad^^ntage of
it, and render its Validity the ^ore sensible.

Dr. Friend pretends, that the Plethora ^n never, of itself, cause such a
Suppres^on, and does never cause it, unless when ^^in'd with a Viscosity and
Slowness of the ^^ood; for, says he, the Particles of the ^^ood being
incorporated, and close linked ^^gether, form such a gross Body as can by (...)
means be insinuated into the Capillaries, ^here, of Course, it forms an
Obstruction: ^ow, these Vessels being stopped, through which ^^e Blood used to
pass, it remains shut up in ^^e bigger Vessels, which are too strong to ^^ve it
Vent through the Rupture of their ^unicks.

At the same time, according to this Au^^or's Reasons, one might demonstrate,
that ^^ese Vessels, big and strong as they are, ^^ght to crack at last, and be
broken. For, (...) the big Vessels are more robust than the ^^all, they are
also attacked by a greater ^^antity of Blood. In the natural State, ^^ey are
counter-balanced, and in an Equilibrium with the Fluid; but, in the present
Case, the Fluid must get the better, because it augments in Strength, by reason
o^ its Bulk being swollen and reinforced from the Reflux of the Juices that
spring out o^ the Capillaries; whilst the Vessels extremel^ surcharged, lose
their Power, and cannon hinder the Interstices of the extended an^ suffering
Fibers from being forced by the Affluence of the Blood that seeks an Out-le^
and, by its exorbitant Mass, has Power enough to make itself one through the
Dyke^ whose Resistance is diminished in proportion as the Strength of the Blood
is encrease^ This is what might be maintained on o^^ Author's System, and by
his own Proof Among Physicians, there are some who explain the monthly Courses
by the Ruptu^^ of the Vessels; others again take a different Road; but it seems
as if People we^^ only dreaming over this Point, and shew^ an Indifference that
does not appear to (...) well grounded: Yet, as we have here est^ blish'd the
Sentiment of Dr. Friend, which is the most in vogue, it may not be ami^ to say
something of another Opinion, which though less common, does not fail, neverth^^
less, strongly to engage us in its Favou^ The Blood of Women being, for the
Re^sons we have declared, liable to gather (...) the Vessels, it should, of
Course, happen that the Blood tending particularly to the lower Parts, and the
Veins having no Valve ^he Arteries may bring more Blood than can ^e returned by
the Veins. Wherefore, the ^eins, being filled to the Top at a certain ^^me,
cannot receive the Blood that is stili ^ought afresh to them from the Arteries:
^his Blood being once shut out from the ^eins, is still less liable to return
from hence it came, whither then will it go? that will become of it? Thither,
no doubt, ^here it finds least Resistance, and that is, (...) the Side of the
Lymphaticks; which be^^g only made to admit the Lympha, and ^nvey it to the
Matrix, in order to moi^^en and lubricate this Viscus, are obliged (...) yield
to the Torrent, to an extraordina^^ Extension of their Texture, and suffer
^^olence in their Diameter, in order to re^^ive this superfluous Blood, pushed
out from ^^e Arteries, and rejected by the Veins. ^ow, as the Lymphaticks must
terminate (...) some Issue, the Canals, or excretory ^ucts, destined to the
Discharge of the ^ympha, serve here to give an Outlet to ^e Blood, and
discharge it.

This mechanical Account, is it not more ^^sy, more simple, more plain and
satisfactory? ^^d does it not more Honor to Nature, than ^^e System of the
Rupture of the Vessels? (...) is a constant Maxim with Philosophers, ^^at
Nature does every thing by Ways the ^ost simple, and least expensive. Now, I
^^k, on which of these two Sides it costs ^^e most? In the first Place, does it
not impair the Vessels much more, by making them so often to suffer a Solution
of their Continuity? Is not this Hurt done to the Substance in its solid Parts
too dear a Purchase? and the frequent tearing of the vascular Tunicks, which
must every Month be broken, is not this paying too great a Price for the Exit
of this Portion of superfluou^ troublesome Blood? But by the other Way how will
it cost so dear? Only a little Enlargement of the Bounds of the lymphatic^
Arteries, a little Straining of their Diameter, which is far from making such
Havoc^ as this Rupture does, yet, at once, does al^ the Business. But let us
carry this Point (...) little further. Dr. Friend pretends to demonstrate how
the Plethora procures the Flux. He has Recourse to the Force (...) the Blood,
which over-powers the For^^ of the Vessels; and, to establish in the Blood this
Superiority, he says, that the Blood increases in its Mass and Velocity while
the Resistance of the Vessels diminishes; because their Fibers being stretch
and widen'd, are thereby deprived of the^^ strict Union and Connection, in
which consists their Force. The Author admits i^ the Blood a considerable
Velocity, and advances, at the same Time, that the Vesse^^ are stretched and
restrained as if the Swiftness of the Blood did not proceed, from its being so
briskly jerk'd, beaten and push forward, by the powerful Oscillation of the
Vessels, which being stretched and restrained, ^re not able to push the Fluid
with so much ^igour; whence it necessarily follows, that ^^e Fluid must lose of
its Velocity, instead ^f gaining more, as the Author pretends. Dr. Friend would
have avoided this Per^exity, had he taken Care to observe the ^oving Force of
the Blood, and had exlain'd himself a little more particularly upon it.
Rejecting, as he does, the Hypothe^s of Fermentation, it is to be presumed he
^bscribes to the Oscillation of the Solids, (...) in Truth he seems to hint in
several Parts ^f his Book. Now, this System makes the ^gitation, or progressive
Motion of the Flu^d, to depend upon the systaltick Virtue of he Solid, whose
Spring being more or less ^nimated, makes the Blood and all the Hunours move
with more or less Precipitation. This is a Principle which we think cannot ^e
denied by Dr. Friend; and yet this Prin^iple makes against himself, because
thence (...) follows, that in Proportion as the Vessels ^ose of their Ease and
Liberty, the Blood, ^ar from taking the Advantage of their Weakness, to attack
and break them, as it does in the Sense of this Author, does it ^elf abate of
its Impulse, and consequently of its Force, and so shares in the Feebleness of
the Vessels, instead of triumphing over ^t. This carries us yet farther.

This Swiftness of the Fluid being a pure Effect of the strong Vibration of the
Solid, which at once both contains and chases it, is not a Portion of the Force
of the Blood, but of the Force of the Vessels, which, without doubt, are strong
enough to defend themselves against the Irruption and Insult of a Humor that
has no other Arms than what they vouchsafe to lend it, and which would remain
dormant, lazy, languishing, if the Vessels were not so kind as to put it in
Motion. Here now, pray what has the Blood to boast of, poor and beggarly in it
self! What has it, which it has not received? And if it has received all it
has, wherewith can it prevail? How can it have the Infolence to employ its
Strength against those that gave it, and turn its Arms to the Disadvantage of
those that armed it? Hence we may plainly see, that the Blood having no
Assistance but what it borrows, cannot thence take any Advantage against the
Vessels; so that there only remains its own Mass whence it can draw any
Succor. But here visibly falls our Author's Demonstration; for the Force of
the Stroke, or of the Percussion, being infinitely greater than any Pressure,
as he himself says after Borelli, Vis actus omni pressione infinito major est;
and the Percussion being the Effect of the Velocity, which it is confessed does
not proceed from the Blood's own Force, it consequently follows, that the
Blood, to break the Vessels, wants just that which is the most proper and
conducive to this Effect; so that the Force of the Percussion failing, the
blood has no more Force, than from the ^ressure of its own Mass; and this, it is
al^ow'd, is not so powerful by far as the Per^ussion. Whence, after all, one
may judge, ^^at Borelli's Proposition is false in one ^ense, and in the present
Case may be de^ed; for the Blood swiftly moved attacks ^e Vessels, and yet it
is proved, that the ^orce of the Attack is less than that of the ^essure;
because the Pressure comes from ^e Mass, and the Mass is properly that which
belongs to the Fluid: It is its own ^^oper Force, and it can do more with ^e
Addition of one Degree of Mass, than ^ith that of twenty extraordinary Degrees
^f Swiftness; the Reason whereof is evient. It Is, for that by its additional
De^ree of Mass, it weakens the Vessel, by ^idening its Fibers, and rendering
them less ^le to withstand their Disunion, which it ever can do by its
Swiftness, suppose it aug^ented to what Degree you please. There^^re, the Force
of the Pressure, unaccompa^y'd with that of the Percussion, is the on^^ Choice
they have, who, after Dr. Friend, ^^plain the Monthly Courses by the Rupture ^f
the Vessels; for, this being pre-suppos'd, ^^e Blood can never be in too great
a Mass, ^^d the Excess of the Plethora can never ^o any thing but Good: The
Blood will ^ave the more Force, as it is the more ^undant and less hurried; for
as soon as it fails of its Swiftness, that will be a Sig^^ that the Vessels
have not Spring enough to push it vigorously; and, in this Case, the more Bulk
it requires, the more it restrain^ them, the more it widens their Fibers, and
puts them out of Condition to sustain it^ Weight, to ply to its Volume, and
resist it Power; can any thing be more advantageous to him than this Situation?
In this System let us examine how we may explain the Monthly Suppressions, and
wha^ way we must proceed to remedy the same We are going to observe, that it is
not indifferent in Practice to make Choice either of the Rupture of the
Vessels, or of the In^trusion of the Blood in to the Lymphaticks as one
pleases; for these two Systems by no means agree; they offer for the Cur^ quite
different Views and contrary Indications: It is then very important, heedfully
to distinguish them; to choose one of them and to take great Care which of the
two we choose, and to which of the two we adhere. This is not to be done with
Indifference, as but too often happens, but very carefully, with the utmost
Exactness, and after having maturely thought upon it When the Blood gathers,
says the Cap. 10.
Author the Pulse then grows more strong, more lively, more quick, till the
Plethora i^ raised to the highest Degree; for there are certain Limits of
Plenitude, beyond which the Quantity of Blood cannot augment, without affecting
and altering its Quality; Est enim certus quidam plenitudinis gradus, ultra
quem, illaesa qualitate sanguinis, ^ugeri nequeat quantitas; for the Plethora
cannot be long a gathering, without lackening the Pace of the Blood; Plethora
enim diu nequit increscere, quin comitem sibi adsciscat sanguinis lentorem:
Since, continues he, toward the Approach of the Flux, the Vessels are
stretched and dilated to the Degree that I have mentioned; because the
Quantity, and consequently the Force of the Blood is increased almost a Tenth.
If the Courses fail twice successivery, the Mass of the Blood will be a Fifth
Part augmented, unless the Flux be equaled by some other Evacuations.
Therefore, the Pressures which the circulating Fluid makes upon the Sides of
the Vessels must augment in Proportion; which said Pressure the Vessels cannot
sustain, without being strangely put to it, laboring already under the the
Load of the Blood that escaped in the first Month; Adeoque eadem rations
increscit ea, qua latera vasorum a fluido circulante urgentur, Pressio; quam a
vasis citra virium noxam sustineri posse nemo credet, qui quam graviter ea sub
primae periodi incursum laborent meminerit: The Slowness of the Blood may be
supposed from its great Abundance, which swells so much, that the Vessels, to
what Degree soever they yield and stretch themselves cannot, without breaking,
give it a Space sufficiently vast; so that the Mass of the Fluid is restrained
and imprisoned in a Vessel, whose Capacity it far surpasses: Lentor al^ ipsa
copia oriri potest, quae it a supra modum intra vasa turgescit, ut ea, utcumque
distenta, satis amplum sanguini circuland^ spatium praebere nequeant, nisi
penitu^ dissiliant fibrae, ita tit cum uberior sit, quam pro vasorum capacitate
fluidi moles, majorem patiatur retinentiam sanguis redundans: Who would think
that these Reasons, which seem to tend to explain the Flux, should end,
nevertheless, in proving the Suppression? That to show how the Menses are
stopped, one should make use o^ all the Conditions requisite to make then flow?
These Conditions are on one Side the great Stretching of the Fibers in the
Vessels, which hinders them from resisting their Division, and puts them in the
nearest Disposition to be dis-united; and on the other Side, the exorbitant
Volume of the Blood as compact, as massive, as close in its Texture, as the
vascular Fibers are loosened, and which bears hard upon the Sides of the
Vessels that contain it; is it not visible, that all the Advantage is here on
the Side of the Blood? The Solid is dilated; the Fluid is close knit; behold!
here is the Extension and the Pressure that is demanded: As for the Swiftness
or Percussion; we have poved, there is no Occasion for it: The ^luid then has
here all the Force it can ^ave; since it has an enormous Reinforce^ent of Mass,
in which, as we have ob^rv'd, consists all its Power; and the Solid as weak as
it can be; since it is owned by ^e Author himself, that it cannot, withit Pain,
Citra virium noxam, sustain the (...) eight of the Fluid; and that the Vessels,
(...) wever dilated, cannot, without bursting, ^^e a free Space to the Blood:
Nisi peni^^ dissiliant fibrae: Then what can hinder is Bursting? Why don't we
immediate^^ see the Fibers crack, they who lose as ^^ch of their Resistance, as
the Blood ac^ires of Strength? All morbifick Suppres^^n, says Cap. 10.
Dr. Friend, depends either on ^e Fault of the Vessels, or on the Fault of ^e
Blood; the Fault of the Vessels consists (...) their Restraint; that of the
Blood, in its ^wness; it is agreed, that the Vessels are (...) here in a State
of Constriction, but, on ^^e contrary, that they are in great Disten^n: So here
is no Fault of theirs, neither the Blood to blame, if it be slow, for its
^wness only proceeds from its great Quan^y, in which all its Strength consists;
so at this Slowness, far from impeding, ra^^er provokes the Flux; for, if the
Blood ^^s less slow, the Vessels would be less re^ain'd, more left, as it were,
to themselves, ^^d enjoying the Advantage of their Ease and Liberty, as the
Blood would have that of its Velocity; they would, by Consequence, be less
disposed to be broken. So, the excessive Plethora, and the extreme Slowness,
far from causing Suppressions, cannot, on the System of the Rapture o^ the
Vessels, but rather procure, and favor in the Sex this particular Evacuation
Dr. Friend calls it a Vice in the Vessels, to be in a Condition to hinder
themselves from being broken; this is indeed a Vice in hi^ System, and in
respect of his Opinion, b^ absolutely, and in the main, it is none. O^ the
contrary, it is a Frailty, a Dishonor a Defect in them, so to break: For the
Vessels to be of a Structure sufficiently foli^ sufficiently furnished and
fortified, seat sufficiently to Advantage, strong enough t^ resist the
Disunion of their Fibers, to with stand their breaking, and stoutly to
mai^tain themselves found and whole, this is (...) a Defect, it is a Perfection.
On the contary, Dr. Friend calls Slowness a Vice in the Blood, which however is
none, on his System, and according to his Hypothesis, the in the main, and in
Fact, it is one; for the Slowness of the Blood, though it be absolut^ly in itself
an ill Quality, is a good one the present Case, it being that which give Power
to the Blood, and makes it strong It follows from thence, that the Blood
canever be too slow, nor too abundant, procure the Courses; then how are the
stopped? how account we for their Suppressi^n? Etmuller, Riverius, Dr. Friend
himself, agree, that an excessive Plethora may ^ause this Suppression; but how
is this to ^e explained in the Doctrine of our Author? (...) it not evident,
that the more enormous ^^e Quantity of the Blood is, the Distenti^n of the
Vessels is made the more consider^^le, and the readier they are to break? ^n
the Hypothesis of the Blood's Intrusion ^^to to the Lymphaticks, nothing is
more easy (...) explain than this Suppression; the Blood-^essels being stuffed,
distended, dilated, and ^^l groaning under the oppressive Weight ^f their
Fluid, have not Play and Liberty enough to expel it into the Lymphaticks, and
to chase it through the Pipes that discharge ^^e Excrement, so as the Fluid
cannot be re^oved, chased, drove on, because the prodi^ious Mass restrains the
Solid, stops and weak^ns its systaltick Virtue; so that it remains ^^agnant in
the sanguine Capillaries, for want ^f a Force strong enough to push it into ^he
Lymphaticks, and, not being able to ^ake its Way through the excretory
Chan^els, it remains engaged in the Vessels, which ^ith its Bulk it oppresses,
and makes the ^ex feel the overwhelming Weight that ^ttends the Suppression of
their Courses.

Every morbifick Suppression, says our (...) Author, which depends upon the
Fault ^f the Vessels, or of the Blood, offers two Indications; the one to open
the Canals that are obstructed and stopped; the other to correct and reduce the
Blood: The Fault of the Canals, continues he, is either to grow hard and stiff
by a natural Dryness, or to be contracted by a sudden Coldness, in such wise,
that they oppose the Impulse o^ the Blood, and resist their being broken. To
remove this Impediment, according to the Opinion of this Illustrious Physician,
we must relaxe the Fibers; but there is an Equivocation in this Relaxe, which
it is wort^ while to clear up; we usually understan^ by Laxity or Relaxation, a
State opposite to Tension, a State where the Fibers are supple and not
stretched, where they a^^ freely, and without Restraint; because being
sufficiently moistened, they are flexibl^ and pliant; whereas Dr. Friend seems
t^ understand by Laxity, the State of the F^bres widen'd, pulled, and stretched
into (...) strong Distention: So, according to thi^ Idea, the more the Canals
are swelled wit^ the Abundance of the Liquid, the more the Fibers will be
widened one from another and the more they will be relaxed; whenc^ it follows,
that, to effect the Relaxation taken in this Sense, and on the present
Hypothesis to make the Menses flow, the sure^^ Means is to draw into the Pipes
as much as one can, wherewith to swell, obstruc^ stuff and clog them. It Is
visible, that a^ this strangely dilating the Vessels, so w^dens their Fibers,
that they scarce touch ^ne another; and this procures the Laxity that Dr.
Friend demands. The Laxity that I first mentioned, taken in the natural and
ordinary Meaning of the Word, is quite ^ifferent from this; and, on the System
of Dr. Friend, as much contrary to the Month^y Courses, as the other is
favorable to them; the one is procured by the Supple^ess and Flexibility, the
other by the Force, ^he Torture, the Pulling and Stretching of ^he Fibers:
Wherefore, if it be proper, in ^rder to make the Courses flow, that the Fibers
should be pulled, stretched, widen'd, and forced, nothing can be more adverse
and opposite to this Flowing, than this State is, where the Fibers are supple,
flexible, pli^ant, at their Ease, their own Masters, unrestrained, no way
suffering, no way molested. This pre-suppos'd, we are going to see which of
these two Relaxations Dr. Friend proposes to us as the Subject of our
Consideration; and we shall observe, upon this Occasion, that he does not too
well, here, agree with himself; for, as these two Relaxations are incompatible,
to admit the one, is excluding the other; though Dr. Friend seems as if he would
chime in with both. For this End, says he, namely, to conquer the Resistance
of the Vessels, and to procure the Relaxation of the Fibers, we must apply
exterior Remedies moderately warm, such as Fumigations, Baths, and
Fomentations, prepared with emollient and penetrating Herbs: Ad hunc finem
tepide adhibentur externa Remedia, qualia sunt Suffitus, Balnea, Fomenta,
exherbis emollientibus, and penetrantibus conflata. This is proper to procure
that Sort of Relaxation which consists in the Suppleness and Flexibility of the
Fibers, but not the other, which consists in the stretching, widening, and
constraining them, to render them less able to resist the Impulse of the Fluid:
Contractu autem vasorum inhibito, vasorum later a laxius explicantur, and
fluido impingenti debilius resistunt. If one has a Mind to break the Vessels,
methinks it is going the wrong Way about it, to make them supple, pliant,
tractable, yielding; for the more flexible and yielding they are, the less they
are disposed to be broken; the more supple, sure the lefs frangible; a dry Cord
will sooner break than a moist one; and if Dr. Friend will be pleased to take a
little Notice of this, he will observe, that a dry and hard Vessel is more
frail and easy to be broke than a pliant, softened, moistened one; what View
then can this able Physician have? and what Indication leads him to relaxe the
Vessels, by Emollients, such as Baths, Fumigations, Fomentations? I here appeal
to the Judgment of this excellent Author himself, so well versed as he is in
Mechanics, perhaps I am dazzled with a false Light myself; yet, till I am
enlightened, I shall always imagine, that the Blood in its Motion will sooner
break Vessels hard and dry, which make Head against it, are directly exposed to
the full Strength of its Impulse, to the Force of its Collisions, more within
the Reach of its Sallies, more the Mark of its Impetuosity, and of its fiercest
and briskest Attacks, than Vessels softened, which, by their yielding
Suppleness, dex^erously avoid all the Thrusts the Blood can ^ake against them;
as we see the pliant ^eeds elude the Attack of the most out^ageous Tempests,
whilst Oaks that stand ^ll butt against them, and stiffly sustain the Assault,
lie rooted up, and prostrate upon the Ground, the illustrious Victims, and the
magnificent Trophies of the furious Tempest's Power. The Cold-too that ^iffens
the Fibers seems also to render them ^he more frail, and liable to break. This
^eing so, who does not see that Desiccatives ^ere are much more proper than
Emollients? ^ho does not here see, that instead of soften^g the Vessels that
are too dry and hard, ^^d slackening the Fibers that are too stiff, ^e must
maintain them in their Dryness and ^^iffness, and far from diminishing any
thing (...) these, we must augment them as much (...) we can; because we shall
infallibly ren^^r the Vessels and Fibers more frail, in ^^oportion as we shall
render them more ^^y and stiff; the more Violence we do ^^em, the more Stress
and Torture we put them to. Emollients, in this Case, seem quite contrary to
our Purpose, because they seem more proper to make the Conduits play, by
setting them at their Ease, than to make them yield to such a Rupture as our
illustrious Author desires. Hippocrates he observes, in a Suppression of the
Courses, advises to begin with a Purgation by Fomentations; suppressis mensibus
fomenta purgationi esse praemittenda mone^ Hippocrates: But if the Purgation
operate in the same Manner as they say the Fluxe^ do, by the Rupture of the
Vessels, the Us^ of Fomentations, far from being serviceabl^ here, would be
hurtful; but as it is confess'^ that the Purge don't work in this Manne^ but by
quite different Ways; to say tha^ the Fomentation is useful here, is at the
same time to say, that it is not prop^^ for the Fluxes, which differ so much
from the Purgation: We foment before Purgation to make the excretory Ducts more
yielding and more disposed to emit their Juices, th^^ they may the better
hearken to the Instig^tion of a Purgative, and be the more e^caciously
persuaded to do what we wou^^ have them: This is our Drift in Foment^tions, and
this does not drive at breaking tearing and disjoining the Fibers, but tr^ to
sooth, temper, refresh and supple the^ to give the Juices we design to
discharge, free, easy, natural Passage through the Issue the Pipes destined for
that Purpose. So the ^o foment in the Suppression of the Terms, ^ll the same as
in Purgation, is to go against ^he Indication that prescribes the Rupture ^f
the Vessels; it is to have opposite Views, and take opposite Courses to the
System in Question. Dr. Friend observes, that the Vessels are more easy to open
in Summer, ^han Winter; yet they are more stiff, more ^retch'd, and, of
Consequence more frail, (...) Winter; so that their Opening seems to ^epend
less upon the Rupture that the Win^er favors most, than upon the Disoppila^^on
of the Capillaries, which the Summer's ^eat promotes most, by means of which
the blood flows more freely, its Velocity is re^forced, its Impetuosity is
augmented, and ^^e Rapidity it contracts in this charming ^eason, prepares it
the better to pass through ^^e Lymphaticks, and to escape through the ^xcretories.
Here behold the Flux re-estash'd; let us now come to the Way of re^oving the
second Cause of Suppression, ^^knowledged by Dr. Friend, which de^ends upon the
Fault of the Blood, and to which he makes an insensible Transition. ^ut, says
he, if the Vessels continue too ^ng hard, the Plethora, which augments very
Day, corrupts, and at last perverts the Blood, whence we have before drawn
another Cause of Suppressions, which is ^ore frequent: Quod si diutius
perstiterit ^asorum durities, Plethora indies accres^ns sanguini tandem vitium
inducit; unde altera, eaque multo frequentior suppressorum mensium causa in
prioribus deducta est. Here we see, beyond Doubt, the excessive Plethora, which
we have shown was so proper to break the Vessels, acknowledged however as the
principal Cause of the Suppression. This seems to me very hard to clear up.
Pray don't forget this last cited Passage, for we shall want you to remember it
in the Sequel.

We would re-settle the Courses; it is a thick, abundant, viscous Blood that
stop them; we must change its Quality. Now the Source of this Quality is its
Excess o^ Quantity; it is this we must fall foul of the Point is to correct the
Slowness: Bu^ the Slowness, it is owned, produces the excessive Plethora; our
Affair is then with this Plethora; it is this we must first attac^ Upon this
Principle, we immediately conceive Bleeding to be of Use. Bellini, a^ we are
told by Dr. Friend, proves, tha^ Bleeding increases the Motion of the Blood
here we should distinguish: Bleeding raise the Fever, and cures it; quickens
the Blood, and makes it run slower: Those wh^ have a right and just Notion of
the anima^ Mechanism perceive the Reason of the^ seeming Contrarieties; the
Vessels being stuffed excessively, have not Freedom enou^^ to exert their
Oscillations, to kindle the feverish Motions, and to conquer the gre^^ Bulk of
stagnant Humors, by hot Strok^ of Systole and redoubled Vibration, we let
Blood, the Resistance is diminished, the Solids are let loose, the Fluids are
disengaged, the Blood is set a running; this ^s the Case of an Apoplexy, to
which ^t is wholesome that a Fever should succeed; the Solids, after having
been so long ^ppress'd, are, at last, at their Ease, set ^t large, and in full
Power, and make ^he agglomerated Fluids that had conspired against them feel
the Force of their Blows, ^he Effect of their Resentment, and the Experience of
their Revenge. The Blood, after first Bleeding, though still abundant enough ^o
vex, irritate, and stretch 'em, yet is no more able to overpower and conquer
'em. Mean while, the Bleeding, having set the Blood in Motion, will in a little
time abate ^ts Sallies, and restrain its Frolicks. The Resistance of the
Fluids, that maintains the Solids in their unbridled Oscillations, in
proportion as it diminishes, will calm and reduce them to their natural
Vibrations; the Fury of the Vessels will abate in proportion as the Mass of the
Blood diminishes, because, by how much the Bulk of the Blood is lessened, by so
much less Opposition will the Vessels feel; the less, of course, will they be
excited to furious Motions, and the more disposed to recover their usual
Course, their ordinary Oscillations, their natural Motions: Then, as the Blood
contracts its Slowness from its excessive Abundance, the Bleeding diminishing
this, shows us how much it contributes to correct the Slowness of the Blood.
This being pre-supposed, one would think the Doctor should favor this Remedy,
and one would not imagine, how, in consequence of his Principles, he could
advance, that in the Beginning of a Disease, the Blood being too slow, it
should not be proper to let Blood, unless there be Reason to hope, that thereby
the Viscidity of the Blood may be corrected; and even though there should be an
Appearance of this, yet ought not Bleeding to be chosen, if any other Method
can be thought of, to restore the Blood to its Velocity, without lessening its
Volume. But what is strangely surprising is, to see such a Man as Dr. Friend,
in whom sound Judgment takes Place so much of Prejudice, giving into vulgar
Notions and Fancies without Foundation* He has Regard to the Weakness of the
Persons who suffer in these Stoppages, which does not proceed from Inanition,
but Over-Repletion; not from a Scarcity, but from a Stock of Forces stowed in
too narrow Compass, which only want to be set at large, as they are by
Bleeding; a Weakness however, from which a Pretense is drawn, to save that
Blood, which wants to be diminished, in order to exert its hidden Force, that
is quite stifled by its own Redundancy; a Weakness whence a Counter-Indication
is drawn against Bleeding, to cure it, to make its unactive, dissembling Force
exert and declare itself. Women, they usually say, are so weak in these
Suppressions, that they cannot bear Bleeding, which causes such a prompt and
brisk Revolution in the Humors: Is not this Language altogether vulgar? It Is
what the common Sort of People usually say through Prepossession, rather than
Reflection. Dr. Friend also says, Neque ^oc sane praetermitti debet, quod in
iis qui^us supperssi sunt menses, it a fere vires im^ninutae sint, ut sanguinis
missionem, a qua ^deo expedita inducitur humorum mutatio, ^ninus sustinere
queant. At this rate, Plethoricks should not be let Blood; for the Plethora
takes away their Strength; and we see that the more Blood they have, the weaker
they are. But this Notion was too unworthy of Dr. Friend, for him to fix for
any time upon it; so it is not long before he goes off from it; Bleeding happens
to fall unto Disgrace; but a few Lines lower, it again recovers its Credit, and
in the very same Case where it underwent the Disgrace. Sometimes, however, says
our Author, the Blood gives certain Symptoms of its State and Constitution,
which, carefully considered, oblige to open a Vein, and to open it too with
Success. One of these Symptoms may be a Pulse full and weak, which is sometimes
observed in the Beginning of a Distemper; nothing but Good can come of Bleeding
upon this Occasion; for thence results a greater Velocity, and, of Consequence,
in the Opinion of Dr. Friend, the greater Force of the Blood. Nonnunquam tamen
sanguis ea de se praebet indicia, quibus siquis diligentus studuerit, venam
haud inauspicato poterit secare: talis indicii exemplum sit pulsus plenus and
imbecillis, qui morbo nondum inveterato aliquando observatur; itaque ad hunc
modum constituto pulsus venae sectio, si adhibita sit, sanguis momentum
intendet. Since a full and weak Pulse allows, and even obliges to bleed, the
Weakness of People afflicted with these Suppressions, is not therefore a good
Reason to forbear Bleeding; for, with a full and weak Pulse, as our Author
observes, and which, in his Opinion, prescribes Phlebotomy, Women cannot but be
weak: It is not the Weakness then that forbids Bleeding. The Reason Dr. Friend
adds to authorize the Precaution he advises, in order to diminish the Blood, is
not very sure; he says, that when the Arteries are so full, that the Tunicks
are stretched, and take up a greater Space, it is a Sign that the Humors are
not yet thickened; for, if their Mass was considerably thick and sizy in its
Texture, it would take up less Room, because its Particles would be less close,
and the Arteries thereby less stretched. This is however, what a Body cannot
trust to, because the Mass of Humors, close thickened and condensed, may
happen to be in such Abundance, as to stretch the Tu^icks to a considerable
Dilatation, without ^bating the Velocity of the Humors, whose Redundance is no
way incompatible with their extreme Condensation. So that, from ^he Arteries
taking up no great Space, there; ^s no concluding, that the Fluid they con^ain
is very massive; for it may be massive, ^ompact, and close in its Texture, at
the ^ame time that it is ample, large, and ex^ended in its Volume. A little
Attention ^ere will show there is no Repugnance in ^his. A little further, the
Author says, that ^he vascular Tunicks, unbent by the Bleed^ng, less resisting
the Blood that strikes upon them, the Force of the Stroke is thereby weakened:
Tunicis sanguini affluenti mi^us renitentibus deficit ictus magnitudo. At this
rate, it is ill done to bleed, since it weakens the Force of the Blow, which ^r.
Friend makes the principal Promoter of ^he Fluxes. The Business therefore is
not ^o slacken the Tunicks, nor to render them ^upple and pliant, but, on the
contrary, to ^tretch them all we can, and to render them ^tiff, dry, and hard;
for Dr. Friend agrees, that in this State they make the most Resistance. Now,
according to his Account in his 4th Mathematical Proposition, Cap. 5.
the Motion lost (that is communicated) is proportioned to the Resistance;
motus deperditus ^st ut resistentia; but the Force of the Strokes is also
measured by the Motion lost: In percutientibus corporibus ictuum magnitudo
motui deperdito proportionalis est. Then, as there is most Resistance made by
the Fibers stretched, stiff, dry, and hard, the Blood that strikes upon 'em
loses still the more of its Motion, since the Motion lost is answerable to the
Resistance made: Therefore the Force of the Stroke is the greater in these
Fibers; since the Force of the Strokes are suitable to the Quantity of the
Motion lost. Therefore, in fine, these Sor^ of Fibers must sooner crack, than
Fibre^ that are supple, slack, and flexible. The Blood is supposed abundant,
observe her^ then the Force! the Fibers are supposed t^ be widened and
distended, behold Weaknes^ here! Wherefore, all the Power and Advantage is here
on the Side of the Blood Now, if the Force of a Body surmount the Force of the
Obstacle it has to encounter, this Obstacle must give way, according to the
second Proposition: Si momentu^ corporis sit majus quam contraria impedimenti
vis, id impedimentum removebitur the Vessels, in this Case, must be broken and
cannot hinder the Blood from extravasing. Upon these Principles, settled by Dr.
Friend himself, methinks, I may, with out the Imputation of too much
Presumption, on, defy him to explain the Suppression o^ the Fluxes by an
excessive Plethora, and by the Dryness and Hardness of the Vessels which make
too great a Resistance; for all ^his wonderfully contributes to the Flux, ^s I
think has been heretofore sufficiently ^emonstrated. Our Author is inclined to
be ^f Opinion, that Bleeding should be used ^ather after than before the
Purgatives and ^mmenagogues, which are the Remedies ^ore especially designed to
promote the re^ular Courses. The Reason he gives for it (...) that the
Purgatives and Emmenagogues ^eak, refine, and attenuate the gross com^acted
Humors; whence the Blood being ^ore clear, is more disposed to be divided,
^^parated, dislodged, and to acquire Force, after Bleeding: But this Advice
seems con^^ary to what he gives before, where he ^dvises not to let Blood, if
there be any ^ther Means to increase its Velocity, with^^t lessening its
Quantity; because in Bleed^^g we diminish the Plethora, which Ple^^ora
contributes in a particular manner to ^^e Force of the Flood, and which, if we
^ave it entire, cannot but augment its ^ower. Now, since the Remedies which
^^r. Friend would prescribe previous to the ^leeding, would break the compact
Texture ^f the Blood, rectify that, and, of Course, ^ive it Velocity, why not
stop there? Why ^eddle with the Plethora, which is so com^ended, and held so
sacred (as we may say) (...) the present System, that we cannot be without it?
Why not rather spare it, when ^^e have procured the Velocity of the Blood
another Way, by other Means than Bleeding? Hence we see, that Dr. Friend ha^
established nothing certain here upon the Matter of Bleeding in Cases of
Suppression* So we don't know what to stick to, no^ what to build upon in his
System. He doe^ not explain himself precisely enough; h^ does not sufficiently
dive into, and unfol^ the Matter: He sometimes loses Sight (...) the Principles
to which all should tend^ and by that means he is led into Perplexities, and
falls into Contradictions but to^ frequently; of all which I shall take (...)
Notice; for I do not here pretend to tra^^ Dr. Friend through all the Windings
and Deviations that appear in his Book.

Before we pass on to an Article so important, as to inquire of the Place where
(...) is fit to bleed, whether it be in the Arm (...) in the Foot; I desire it
may be called t^ Mind, that the Swiftness of the Blood is th^^ principal
Foundation of our Author's System and yet we have proved it to be a ruino^^
Foundation; since the Blood cannot app^^ to the Disadvantage and Prejudice of
the Vessels, a Strength it receives from them and a Velocity for which it is
obliged t^ them: So that the Doctrine of our Autho^ is, in that Point alone,
sapp'd from the very Foundation. This is what I desire man be well remembered,
once for all; for have no Inclination to be troublesome, b^ repeating it so
often over; Lindanus Etmuller counsels, at the Approach of the Courses, to
bleed in the Arm; whereas in the actual Course, already begun, he sends you to
bleed in the Foot; which he never ^rders to be done, but in a Course either
actually flowing, or suddenly stopped: And Etmuller accounts for this Doctrine
in the following Manner.

Upon the Approach of the Menses, the Blood being abundant and swelled, Nature
^xerts all her Efforts to precipitate it to the ^ower Parts; but the Conduits
being small, cannot, on a sudden, yield and open so ^^on; on the contrary,
being stretched and ^onstrain'd, they refuse a Passage to the blood; because
they are not at Freedom ^o contract themselves, and make way for ^he Blood. In
this Circumstance, if you ^leed at the Foot, you draw the Blood ^ownwards, you
charge the Matrix more, ^ou add Clog upon Clog, and raise the Di^emper to the
highest Degree. On the contrary, bleed in the Arm, you divert the blood from
the Parts that are oppressed therewith; you facilitate its Course, you clear ^he
Ways through which it is to pass; and ^ou give the Conduits the Suppleness they
^ant to issue forth the Blood they convey; ^or the Bleeding at the Foot will
never ^rovoke the Terms, unless they be actu^lly flowing, or by a sudden Cold,
or seiz^ng Fright, have their Course interrupted. This way of Reasoning Dr.
Friend can no wise relish; it has something in it that is strange and shocking
to him. Here it is supposed, says he, that the Blood is so swelled and
rarefied, that it might easily flow thro'^ the Vessels, if, when it is carried
downwards, the Plenitude it contracts did not form an Obstacle to its
Discharge; that the Vessels, the more they are gorged with Blood, are less in a
Condition to yield to the Torrent. He rejects this; finds it contrary to
Medical Philosophy, and even inconsistent with common Sense. But is this
Reproach well grounded? and have not we a Right to make it recoil upon its
Author? Etmuller is here accused not to have common Sense^ This Accusation, if
it be found unjust, will it not rebound upon Dr. Friend? Shall we have more
Respect for him than he has for^ one of the greatest Masters in Physic? The
English Physician is so pre-possess'd with his own Opinion, and so glew'dd, as
it were to his own System, that he considers n^ other's; and takes no Pains to
enter into the Sentiments of the German Physician. There is a System which is
satisfied to make the Vessels yield or burst to give way to the Menses;
according to this Idea, it is natural and reasonable, that the more the Vessels
are swelled and distended by the Blood the more fit they are to yield and to be
broken: But have we not observed, tha^ Dr. Friend himself falls into the same
Absurdity, which he reprimands in Etmuller have we not observed a Case where
the Di^tention of the Vessels being pre-suppos'd, and the Abundance of the
Blood that dilates them, he still owns a Suppression? We need ^ut call to Mind
what has been lately said upon the Slowness of the Blood. Bye and ^ye we shall
see another parallel Case; so that it is important not to let flip, without
Notice, what he advances here. At the ^ame Time this System, which we have just
^ow seen, is not the only one; there is another which does not make the Vessels
yield, ^ut, on the contrary, makes them act to ^rovoke the Terms. Now, the
Fluxes, on ^his Hypothesis, not depending on the Vessels that yield, but which
make the Blood ^ield to them; not on their conquered Forces, ^ut on their
superior Action, on their victor^ious Power, on their sovereign Empire, on
their triumphant Oscillation: It Is not, on ^his System, a thing contrary to
common Sense, that the Vessels should be so much ^ess fit to procure the
Courses, the more ^hey are dilated and swelled to Excess; because then, though
much more easy to be overcome, they are less qualified to ad act and free
themselves; which is what is required in this other System. Our Author will
have it, that, if the Bleeding in the Foot provokes the Terms that flow, or
that are stopped in Flowing, it would also recall them, when suppressed, from
their Flux, though of a long Standing. This Consequence is not just; but why,
says he, in the first Case, does this Bleeding augment the Force of the Blood,
in hurrying it downwards, and does not augment it in the second Case, acting
still in the same Manner? The Question is not here about the Force of the
Blood: Etmuller is not obliged to speak in Consequence to the Principles of Dr.
Friend; and Dr. Friend is but ill warranted to measure every thing by his own
Ideas, and suit every thing to his own Hypothesis, To do this, he first must
prove, that the only way to be taken is that which he has taken; and that his
is the only System that can rationally be followed: He ought first to have made
it impregnable, and not have left such a Hold to be laid on it as he has done;
since this System, according to what appears in our Remarks, is by so many Ways
so successfully shaken.

The Bleeding in the Foot excites the Terms that flow, and that are interrupted
in flowing; because then the sole Business is to assist the Blood's
Determination toward the Uterine Region; the Blood flows; this is a Sign that
it is cleared, refined, well-condition'd; and that the Vessels are not
embarass'd; now, the Passages, the Issues, the Conduits being free, and
cleared, the new Blood which the Bleeding in the Foot determines that way, will
easily pass, and without Pain, proceed to its Exit. The Blood that just now
flowed, ceases, and flows no more. In this Case, it is only repelled; only its
Determination happens to be altered by some unlucky Accident; and you must
recall the Blood to its Determination downwards. Here you have nothing to
conquer ^ut the Repercussion wrought, either, for Example, by a stopping Cold,
or by a seiz^ng Fright; and this the Bleeding in the Foot does; it determines
the Blood toward ^he Matrix, and restores it to its former Tendency: But a
Suppression of a long ^tanding, being caused by the Congestion and Stoppage of
the Blood in the Uterine Ca^illaries, our Business is not here about its
Tendency toward the Vessels, but about its Discharge and Enlargement from the
Vessels themselves: The Matter is not now to ^ttract the Blood downwards, but
to clear ^way that which is already there, and which is there but in too great
a Quantity; ^ince it is this very Quantity itself that ren^ers it there so very
clogging and trouble^ome. Dr. Friend agrees, that the Bleed^ng in the Arm
practiced in such a Case, withdrawing a Portion of the Blood toward ^he
superior Parts, the Conduits of the Womb are thereby in Truth relieved; but,
^ays he, the Diminution of the Plethora ^bating the Impetuosity of the Blood,
the Vessels are not so disposed to break, because ^he Vessels are less
extended. This is another irregular Reason, which supposes we cannot take from
the Abundance of the Liquid, without abating aught of its Velocity; which is
directly contrary to what the Author owns himself, a little before, in these
Words: Igitur triduo ante, consultum perioditempus, secatur vena, ut tum
praecipue novus sanguini accrescat impetus, cum augmenti summam attigerit
Plethora. What Stress can we lay, after this, upon the Decisions of Dr. Friend?
What can we reckon upon? To what Principle shall we adhere? The Sentiment of
Etmuller is confirmed by a famous Observation of Riverius upon a Woman whose
Terms always stopped as often as she was blooded in the Foot, and very largely
flowed when she was blooded in the Arm: This Phenomenon agrees but little with
the ordinary Ideas of Physicians The Doctors of Montpellier have explained it
by a Mechanism very well contrived, but incompatible with the System of our
Author; whom one may defy, with all hi^ Efforts and vast Capacity, to account
for this Fact, related in the Second History o^ the First Century of Riverius's
Observations. This Woman, say the Doctors, being Plethorick, and attacked with
a Suppression, caused by the prodigious Mass of the Blood, which dilated the
Vessels of the Matrix to such a Degree, that they could not sufficiently use
their contracting Power; when, by bleeding in the Foot, the Blood was
determined toward those Parts which were already over-charg'd therewith, the
Clog was augmented; and Occasion given to an obstinate Suppression; but when,
by bleed^ng in the Arm, the Blood was invited to the superior Parts, the
Vessels of the Uterus were disengaged: Now, their Plenitude and Distention
being diminished, they could con^ract and play with more Ease, and so pro^ure
the natural and periodical Evacuation, which is made through Issues of the
Matrix. Dr. Friend intrenches himself in this Sub^erfuge, which is in a
Distinction he makes ^etwixt a Plethora, which he calls solita^y, and that
which is joined with a Lentor; and he says, it is only in this that the
Pre^aution of Lindanus, noted in Etmuller, ^akes Place. He adds, that the
Woman, ^f whom Riverius speaks, was troubled ^ith this Sort of Plethora; and
upon this ^ottom he approves the Indication which ^he Montpellier Doctors have
taken, and ^ubscribes to their Practice. The Author ^hen grows a little more
mild toward Lindanus, and declares, that what is rela^ed by Etmuller takes
Place in one Case; ^e is therefore in the wrong, to cry out so ^ard against it,
and pronounce, without Ground, that there is not common Sense in ^he Reasoning
of that Author. Here he should make Reparation to his Honor: He agrees, that,
in Suppressions, one bleeds first in the Arm, and then in the Foot; he ^ssigns
for a Reason of this, that the bleed^ng in the Arm augments the Velocity of the
Blood, and bleeding in the Foot augments the Plethora, in regard to the uterine
Vessels. But is this what he said at first? Might not one prove by his own
Principles, that the Consent he gives to this Practice is not very rational?
Let us call to Mind what Dr. Friend has said; does not common Sense require,
that the more the Vessels are swelled, the more they are supposed to yield,
crack and break? Ne communis quidem sensus ferret, vasa quo magis sanguine
distenta sint, eo minus esse ad cedendum facilia. Now, in the Plethorick Woman
we are talking of, when she is blooded in the Foot, this augments the Swelling
of the uterine Conduits, which are thereby more disposed to break, and give
way; yet the Doctors of Montpellier caused the Woman to be blooded in the Arm
and, by this Bleeding, one will say with Dr. Friend, it is true, that the
uterine Passages are cleared of their Stoppage and Oppression; but as the
Impetuosity of the Blood languishes by the Diminution of the Plethora, the
Vessels are rendered less liable to break, because they are then less extended
Secta Brachii vena, cum nonnihil sursu^ revellitur, liberantur quidem ab
oppression^ viae uterinae, sed impetu ob Plethoram imminutam languente, haud
ita facile dissili unt vasa, quia minus sunt distenta. The Slowness and the
Viscidity of the Blood is according to our Author, a Reason not t^ bleed; and
Bleeding does no good in Sup^ressions, save when the Particles of the Blood are
enough disengaged, and not very ^enacious; because then they easily shift their
Place, and are persuaded to what he ^alls Dimotion. Now, he agrees, that the
Blood of the Woman we talk of was vis^ous, slow, and tenacious; how then, on
his ^rinciples, can he allow her to be blooded? ^ne has only to compare what he
has ad^anced with the Explications he now gives, ^n Occasion of this Woman, to
see that all ^on't agree, and that the System which is ^ffered to us, as
incontestable, and as a ^rst Principle avowed by every body, is not ^ell
supported. I should have a great many ^ore Remarks to make upon it, but I con^e
myself to this precise Reflection, which ^ay furnish many more: If the Flowing
of ^e Menses could be wrought by the Rup^re of the Vessels, it would be more
parti^larly done when the Vessels were the most ^angible; now, the Vessels are
most frail, ^hen they are the most extended; but they ^re the most extended,
when they; are the ^ost gorged with Blood; and they are more ^org'd with Blood,
by bleeding in the Foot, ^an by bleeding in the Arm; therefore, ^eeding in the
Foot stuffs them more with blood, stretches them more, and makes ^em more
frangible. Then, as bleeding (...) the Foot renders the Uterine Vessels ^ore
frail, and more ready to be broken, it should, in the Woman we are speaking of,
provoke the monthly Flux. If this Flux is wrought by the Breaking of the
vascular Tunicks, the Blood is excessively abundant, it has all that it can
want to prevail; the Vessels on their Part are dilated and stretched to the
last Degree; so here is all that is wanting to conquer them; the, what hinder^
them from being broken? and since the bleeding of the Foot, in stretching them
disposes them more than ever to burst, is i^ not evident, that it favors, and
ought eve^ necessarily to produce the Flux, if thi^ must be explained by the
Rupture of the Vessels? I omit several Irregularities, to finis^ this
Discussion with two Words of Observation upon some Histories of Fact, relate by
our Author, concerning Suppression. The first History is of a Girl Eighteen
Years old yet without her Terms, who complained (...) a great Pain in her
Loins, Knees, and Ancles; she had Difficulty in breathing, Squeamishness, and
Gripes; her Heart, upon the least Exercise, panted; her Complexion wa^ lively
and florid; her Pulse weak an^ slow; she was very much afflicted with the^
Symptoms for about Six Months: Dr. Frein^ did not find here any Indication for
Bleeding, he only proposed to break and refin^ by Attenuants, the viscous
Texture of the Blood.

But is it not a wise Precaution, when the Vessels are too much stretched, and
the Blood too thick, sizy and stiff, to unbend the Vessels; and to diminish the
Volume of the Blood, in order to facilitate the Action of ^ncisive Remedies,
that they may lay more Hold upon the massive Humors? Is it not ^isquing a
great deal to undertake to rarify (...) Blood which we don't diminish in the
Vessels, whose Sides we cannot further ^tretch, and all whose Space the Blood,
by ^ts Thickness, now takes up? Where then will be Space for it in its
Rarefaction? But ^his is the Means, one will say, to make ^he Uterine
Capillaries crack; but this is ^lso the Means to burst other Vessels too: This
Practice makes us justly fear the Rupture of other important Vessels, and of
consequence terrible Hemorrhages. Besides, it ^s enough, if we consult the
Motions of Physic, to persuade us, that a Mass of Juices, thick, gross, glewy
and compact, resists too much the Action of Attenuants, and the Virtue of
Incisives, for them to be able to ^ay hold of, penetrate, and thrust themselves
thereinto: They can do no more in this Case, but shove, struggle, and rummage
in this Mass, instead of insinuating nicely into the Pores, wriggling subtly,
and without Noise, into the Interior of the Substance, so to separate with as
much Efficacy, as little Disturbance, the Particles thereof. Bleeding, which is
preparative to the Use of Opium, and which the most secures us in it, as has
been clearly proved in the judicious Reflections that have been made thereupon,
should, for the same Reasons, be a Preparative for Emmenagogues, and secure
their Success.

Bleeding then might have been applied in curing the sick Person in Question;
every thing seemed to indicate this, and, above all, the Difficulty of
breathing, the Palpitation of the Heart, and the ruddy Color of the Face; but
the Obstruction which appeared in the Region of the Matrix, whither the Blood
had flowed with too much Precipitation, and where it had contracted a powerful
and well-knit Body, required the Bleeding to be not in the Foot, but in the
Arm; therefore it seems, that had the Patient been bled in the Arm, one might
have thereby freed the lower Parts, that were gorged, and, as it were,
suffocated; and, by un-corking them, one might have engaged them to yield
readily to the desired Evacuation. Dr. Friend, however, declares, that he did
not think fit to employ this Remedy, by reason of the Weakness of the Girl, and
because he apprehended, by this means, he might diminish, instead of augmenting
the Blood: But these are Conjectures too weak and light to divert from the Use
of a Remedy indicated, in other respects, by such pressing Motives; the
Weakness, above all, is not in itself, as we have already shown, a good Reason
to omit Bleeding. Our Author, in his third Observation, gives us the History of
a Washer-woman, of a sanguine Complexion, about Twenty Four Years old, who, in
washing with her Terms upon her, was seized with a Fit of Coldness; she was
also washing her Legs with cold Water; wherefore, the Flux having been here
re^ell'd by the Cold, her Terms disappeared ^or a Year, without any great
apparent Consequence. Dr. Friend accounts, by her great Fatigue and Labors,
for the little ^rejudice this seemed to do her Health: ^ut, about the End of
the Year, she felt a ^ery considerable Change; such as, a great Heaviness and
Weakness, the Action of the ^tomach infeebled, the Function disordered, (...)
Pain in almost all her Limbs, a Cough, a Difficulty of Breathing, a Paleness, a
Swel^ing of her Legs, where so hard a Tumor ^red, that it was impossible, by
any Plaster ^r Cataplasm, to soften it, or to bring it ^o Suppuration; and her
Pulse became fee^le, and languishing. The Patient would ^ave prevented all
these Accidents, if, at ^he Time of her Flux's Repercussion, she ^ad got
herself blooded in the Foot, according to the Remark of Lindanus, and ^he
Reflections of Etmuller. Dr. Friend, who, in all Likelihood, did not see the
Washer-woman, but in the Time of the inve^erate Suppression, took from the
Tumor an ^ndication to make her be bled in the Arm; which he owns did no great
good; but bleeding in the Foot, though a long time after the Interruption of the
Flux, would perhap^ have had better Success, in regard to the Source of the
Suppression which seems to require this Bleeding, and which we the more readily
believe, as the Blood shows no Appearance of gathering, slakening and
Congestion, in the Uterine Conduits; and if it don't flow that way, this seems
to be net so much through any Clog or Impediment that might be there
contracted, as for want of its being determined toward those Parts. And what
justifies this Thought o^ mine is, the Remark it self of Dr. Friend who
explains how the Suppression might have been so long a Time inoffensive, by the
great Exercise of the Washer-woman which did not allow much Time for the Blood
to sojourn, stagnate, corrupt, and stick in the Uterine Region, so tossed an^
jumbled as it was, and by Consequence re^der'd more transpirable by the Woman
Agitation. There seems then nothing her wanting to the Blood, but a proper
Determination toward the Matrix, which is favored and promoted by bleeding in
the Foo^ and that ought here to have been done according to the Notions I
offer; which, after all, are but Conjectures I venture to mak^ and submit, with
all my Heart, to the Judgment of Physicians, among who^^ Dr. Friend shines in
so distinguished a Ran^ This able Physician, who judged it not co^venient at
first to use this Bleeding, did u^ ^t toward the End of the Distemper, after
Purgatives and Emmenagogues, to give the ^inishing Stroke to the Cure, and so
complete ^is Work. Four or Five Days after this Bleeding, her Terms appeared,
the Patient ^ecovered her rosy Color, and all the Ac^idents vanished. Now we
have nothing ^eft to do, but to apply to the Emmena^ogues the Inconvenience
that Dr. Friend ^nds in bleeding, in Relation to the Sup^ressions: This will
pin up the Basket, and hew that his Principles clash, and that his System, though
displayed with all the Clear^ess, and proved with all the Reasons that ^t is
susceptible of, don't appear well sup^orted. When, says he, after Bellini, Cap.
11.
a ^eady Removal of the Blood follows after bleeding, or when the Blood is so
rarefied, that its Particles are dis-unitedy and easily divided one from
another, this Liquor acquires a Velocity that fortifies its Power, because the
animal Spirits, enlarged and free, flow to the Heart in a cheerful Abundance,
and the Blood, broken and subtiliz'd, makes less Resistance against the Action
of the Vessels: But, if no Removal follows, the Quantity of the Blood being
abated, the Velocity is so likewise; and so the Blood loses of its Force. It
were to be wished, insinuates Dr. Friend, that Bellini ^had established a
constant Token, a certain Sign of this Constitution of the Blood, that suffers
a Removal by bleeding, and of that other which does not suffer any thereby;
because, for want of knowing this State and Disposition of the Blood, the
Physician cannot be sure in what manner Bleeding will change it, and modify its
Motion for the better or the worse. By reason of this Uncertainty and doubtful
Success of Bleeding, we must abstain therefrom, unless the Violence of
Accidents enforce it: For if, in letting Blood, we render it more slow and
compact, not only fewer animal Spirits will arise from it, and so the Stroke of
the Beating of the Heart will be the more weak, but the Obstruction that
afflicts the Capillaries, and holds 'em Captives, will gather new Force.
Therefore, in the Beginning of the Suppression, Bleeding does not seem to be
indicated, unless one plainly sees the Means to break infallibly the compact
Texture of the Blood, and to redouble its Force by renewing its Velocity; let
us examine, according to his Model, the Action of the Emmenagogues, that makes
a Part of the Alteratives, and then consider, after Cap. 14.
Dr. Friend, if the Action is more certain, and the Success more allured. How
says he, can the same Force surmount such different Resistances? How can a
Remedy act in so uniform a manner, when the Subjects upon which it operates are
so unlike? There is nothing more ridiculous than to expect from a Medicament a
constant Action, a faithful Energy, an infallible and permanent Virtue, since
it is not strange or ^epugnant for one and the same Remedy ^o produce contrary
Effects. Suppose, for Example, the Disposition of the Blood be ^uch, that the
greater Part thereof is ex^remely vitiated, and the Lentor too obsti^ate to be
conquered by the Force of Atte^uants; in this Case, if we apply a Reso^utive or
Subtilisant, it has no Effect but upon the thinner Part of the Blood, which ^t
melts and refines, till it makes it pass in ^bundance through the Strainers, that
is, through ^he Glands and the Filtres of Secretion; so, ^he most subtle, or
finest Parts of the Blood ^eing discharged by the Force of the Me^icine, the
Remainder of the Mass will ^hereby be but the more compact, thick, and close.
Do but observe, how the Dia^horeticks, those powerful Attenuants, do ^^metimes
even augment the Lentor, and ^he Grossness of the Humors, as we see ^y
Experience. Quomodo enim eadem vis ^iversa long momenta queat pervincere?
^uomodo similis semper esse posset agentis ^^ergia, cum it a dissimilis prorsus
sit corpo^is in quod agitat Natura? Constantem hanc medicamentis sperare
efficaciam, ita ri^iculum est, ut nihil mirum sit, si etiam ab ^dem medicamento
educi possit effectus con^arius: Concipiamus enim earn esse sangui^is crasin,
ut pars ejus long maxima insigniter lentescat, cohaeret aeque in ea momentum
validius sit quam quae ab attenuantium biribus resolvi queat. In hoc casu, si
adhiveatur medicamentum resolvens, eam quidem sanguinis partem, quae minus
lentescit, ita fundit and attenuat, ut per glandulas excretorias uberius
extrudatur: ita medicamenti vi, eliminatis particulis tenuioribus, crassior
erit reliqui sanguinis compages: ad hunc modum, uti and docet experientia,
lentorem aliquando augent Diaphoretica. Yet must we not exclude Resolutives,
because of their doubtful Success, and uncertain Issue: Dr. Friend makes often
use of them, without Hesitation, at the same time that he should either abstain
from them, or not use them, but with such Precautions as himself prescribes in
bleeding: We must beforehand be assured of the State of the Blood know, in that
Point, what we have to go upon, have Tokens that denote the Degre^ of Lentor or
Viscidity requisite to be carried off by the Emmenagogues. As we a^^
admonished, that we must have some o^ these Signs that mark to us the Degree o^
Thickness capable of being corrected by the bleeding, for want of which the
first Reliefs are no more practicable than the last they are both alike
uncertain: Then, upon what Account is the one preferred to the other? This
should have been cleared up Dr. Friend should have instructed us in thi^ and in
this, as well as many other thing but for the Death of the illustrious Author,
we had Reason to hope from him further Lights. He flatters himself, that this
fine Phenomenon about the Courses can no way be explained, but by his
Principles; yet I have ventured upon other Principles, and the System of the
red Part of the Blood being engaged in the Canals of its white Part, the
prevailing Opinion of Dr. Helvetius; and which he has so much illustrated on
the Subject of the Small Pox, of which he has so learnedly and usefully
treated: A System! which gives Light into the Explication of the Hemorrhages
and Inflammations, and which so perfectly agrees with the animal Economy, and
natural Mechanism. This System, I say, yields in nothing to that which Dr.
Friend has given us, not only as the best, but as the only one. From the
Principles I have already laid down, every one may make his Remarks upon the
other Parts of the Author's Book, which I have not touched; and it is likely,
that with ^ow much the more Attention and Care one shall apply to this, the
more the Weakness of his Reasoning will appear, and the Uncertainty of his
Hypothesis. From the Reflections that have been hitherto made, ^t may be
gathered, that it is, by no means, an indifferent Matter in Practice, to adopt
indifferently, the System of the Rupture of the Vessels, or that of the
Intrusion of the Blood into the lymphatick Canals: It is of the highest
Consequence, to chufe either the one or the other, to list on one Side or the
other, and to appear more than ordinarily engaged or concerned therein. If the
Dispute here was only about some insipid, barren Point of Speculation amusing
perhaps to the Curious, but altogether useless, and without Influence on
Practice, those who regard things only as they are useful, might perhaps
slumber over it: But as our Business here is about a capital Point, which
affects and concerns Practice to the highest Degree; since in the two
Hypotheses the Manner of Cure is quite different; this ought to awake the
Attention of all Practitioners, inspire them with an extraordinary Relish for
the present Subject, and rouse them totally out of their Indifference. Some
will perhaps attack the fundamental Principle of these Reflections, which is,
that the Blood owes its Velocity to the Impulse, and systaltick Virtue of the
Solids; they will tell me, that the Vessels may be enormously distended and
stretched to Excess, and still the Fluid which they contain may move on with
Impetuosity, by virtue of the Medicaments that act upon it, that break its
Texture, bruise its Mass, correct its Viscidity, quicken its Lentor, and
separate its Parts; whence may result an Increase of its Force, a Renewal of
its Velocity, and all this independent of the Oscillation of the Vessels, which
still remain stretched, constrained, and, as it were, captive. This has been
proved by a Number of Experiments: A Mixture has been made of the Blood newly
drawn from the Artery of a Dog, with several Druggs, which Mixture has given
Occasion to various Phenomenon. The Blood mixed with the Spirit of Salt
Armoni^c, was of a beautiful Red, and fine Consi^tence, mixed with a Decoction
of Savin, or Horehound, it appeared of a deeper Red, and of a finer Substance;
with Sydenham's Liquid Laudanum, it was of a brighter Co^our, than with the
Decoction of Savin, though not of a much finer Substance; with the Distilled
Water of Rue, or Wormwood, it ^ontinued very fluid from the First till the
Thirteenth of February. A Mixture was ^lso made of the Serum of Human Blood
with the Tincture of Aloes drawn with Mint Water, with a Decoction of Savin, a
De^oction of Gentian, Spirit of Tartar, of Saffron, of Turpentine, of Guaiacum,
and of Hartshorn; the Oil of Turpentine, of Guaiacum, of Lavender, and of
Cloves: By means of these Druggs successively applied, the Serum held fluid
many Days, but nothing rendered it near so fluid and so fine, ^s the Decoction
of the Jesuit's Bark. We have been also assured of the Working of Medicines
upon the Blood, by Injections and Intromissions into the Body of a living
Animal: We need but consult thereupon the ^4. Chap. of the Emmenology of Dr.
Friend, which proves by unquestionable Experiments, that the Blood is altered,
changed, modified, attenuated, broken, refined, set in Motion, and rendered
fluid, by the Power of Emmenagogues: Therefore the Fluid having another Mover
than the Oscillation of the Solid, may be moved rapidly, impetuously, and
precipitately, even when this Oscillation is languishing, feeble, and impotent:
Therefore the Blood may have the Advantage of Mass, Velocity, Pressure and
Percussion: Therefore, the Vessels being enormously dilated, weakened, and
constrained, may be forced by the Action of the Blood, an Action which it has
independent of the Vessels, and from which they can draw no Advantage; a Stroke
consequently which it can give them, without being accused of Ingratitude, and
without incurring the odious Reproach of turning it^ Power against those who
gave it. This Stroke the Vessels will be unable to resist and be forced to
yield to it, broken, disarmed, and overwhelmed, not by the Power which they
(the Vessels) lend to the Blood since they have none to lend, but by that which
the Blood has borrowed elsewhere This is what may be objected against me and
certainly I have given the Objection al its Weight, and wish heartily it might
screen Dr. Friend from any Attack. I agree, that Medicines act upon the
Humors, and inspire them with diverse Qualities; but it is proper to observe
first, that this is not always immediately, nor without the Participation of
^he Solids. The first Operation of Reme^ies inwardly taken is upon the Stomach,
and thence spreads through the whole Genus ^ervosum, whereof this Viscus is a
Part; and consequently it is not strange, that the ^tomach should transmit the
Modifications and the Impressions which it receives. The ^uickest Operation of
Medicines, and the ^riskest Revolutions they cause, are due to ^he sudden
Emotion which the Solids ac^uire, when they are affected by the Medi^ines,
Smoke raises the Vapors, and cures them; the Sprinkling of cold Water, the
^are Taste of good Wine, recovers from a Swoon, recals the straying Soul, and
re^ores the lost Faculties. Remedies often^imes make no Change in the Blood,
but by means of the Solids, which they first change, and whose Tone they alter,
so that they ^ecome more elastick, or more moderate, according to the Action of
the Remedies, that work and drive on the Fluids with more ^r less Heat; whence
ensues in the Blood more or less Refinement and Celerity. Dai^y Experience
proves the great Share the Solids have both in the Disease and in the Cure;
they are the Lords of the Animal Economy, the Principle of every Good, and of
every Evil there.

But now, after those general undetermined Ideas, which it is good to advance,
let us descend to something more particular, which more nearly regards the
Difficulty we have been forming. Upon this I have two Reflections to make; the
first, that the Virtue of Medicines has nothing at all to do with a State of
Health. In the Case of an ordinary and natural Flowing, the Blood then makes
its own Way through the Tunicks of the Vessels, yet is not put in Motion, nor
pushed, nor made fluent, refined and fluid, by the Power of the Medicines;
therefore, if it has Celerity, it owes this to the Oscillation of the Solids,
which, with redoubled Strokes of Systole, impart to it its present Motion, and
accelerate its Flowing: For, I believe, it will be granted, without Difficulty,
that the Blood which is not broken, agitated, and attenuated, by Remedies, can
be no otherwise so, but by the Means of the Vessels; so that, if it is in
Action, it must owe this Action solely to the Spring and Vibration of the
Solids; what other Cause, on the present Hypothesis, can move the Blood? what
other Mover, what other Principle can give any other ways Agitation to this
Fluid? Does it move itself? Has it in its own Stock wherewitha^ to put itself
in Play? Does it draw its Power from its own Choice? I appeal to Dr. Friend
himself, who undermines the Foundation of the Blood's intestine Power, and who,
from the Beginning of his Work, gives a mortal Blow to the Fermentation already
so much discredited, and the finishing Stroke to the Disgrace of this unhappy
Hypothesis, by the desolating Refusal of his Protection to it, leaving it
helpless in black Despair, and reducing it to a Condition utterly abandoned.
The absurd Hypothesis, says he, of the Fermentations and Leavens is scarce any
more in Vogue; it is even a long Time since the soundest Part of the Learned
have banished it out of their Writings: Sed exolevit fere hodie absurda illa de
fermentis Doctrina, and a sanissimis saltem scriptoribus, jamdiu explosa est.
See then this Idol of the new Physic, and of the modern Philosophy, neglected,
abandoned, overwhelmed! What a Spectacle! a Doctrine which attracted such a
Crowd of Partisans ^ecomes deserted and forlorn; the predominant Hypothesis,
the sovereign Doctrine, the reigning Opinion, is falling into Widowhood, into
Contempt and Slavery; is made a Tributary, languishing in Obscurity, and
sighing all alone, finding none to comfort her in her Misery, and to raise her
from the Ground, where she miserably grovels: Even those that listed under her
Standard are ashamed to defend her Cause, quit her Side, and leave her in the
Lurch. The Ways by which it was pretended to explain all the Animal Economy,
Ways beaten and rebeaten with so much Pomp and Solemnity, are now no more
frequented; the Niches of the Ferments are destroyed, and the Ferments, even
the Instruments of Fermentation, are taken from her, poor Thing! she has not
allowed her a Space ample enough to make her Pushes and her Sallies in; pent in
Canals too straight, in Places too close for her; where she undergoes the
Cruelty of being oppressed and stifled, destitute, in these inextricable
Difficulties, of all Relief, and unable to defend herself; all her Charms are
fled from her; and her armed Adversaries have laid violent Hands on all that
belongs to her, depriving her of all that she can desire, or that can give her
any Advantage O ye that have run through all the different Hypotheses! consider
if there is one of 'em all so cruelly treated, and that languishes in a
Situation so very deplorable as hers. What! says one, the Doctrine of the
Ferments is no more in Use! and the Literati have hissed it off the Stage; sad
Case! Is this the Fermentation that a while ago made such a Figure! Can you
know her again by this Picture, you that used so to idolize her! you that still
are so fond of her, is it possible, Sirs, that this can be the Object of your
Delight and tenderest Addresses! This Offal, this May Game, this Bitch with a
Bottle at her Tail, can this be your Favorite Mistress! Can you own this your
Idol in so disguised a Metamorphosis Fermentation is then in Disgrace with Dr.
Friend; and according to him, with al^ the best Authors too. Then he cannot
admi^ in the Blood a Virtue proper to make it circulate; it is therefore
allowed to believe, that the Motion, the Swiftness of the Blood, in the natural
State of Health, is the Effect of the Action of the Vessels that press, push,
and hurry it; and the Acknowledgment of Dr. Friend, who rejects this
Fermentation, ^eads to this Thought, conducts to this Consequence. This just
comes to what we ^ave been demonstrating, that the Blood cannot make an ill Use
of the Celerity which ^t has from the Vessels, thereby to break ^hese; whence
it follows, either that the ^erms can never naturally flow, without ^he Aid of
Medicines; or that the Velocity ^f the Blood is not necessary to the Flux, ^ut
is even contrary to it. If the Fluid ^aturally holds its Celerity from the
Solid, which hastens its Way; and if, by Virtue ^f this Celerity, the Fluid
cannot break the ^olid, as has been proved; then, of ne^essity, Nature alone
cannot push the Terms, ^nless it be the Abundance, and not the Ve^^city of the
Blood that makes 'em flow. ^et Dr. Friend makes the principal Mover ^f the Flux
to consist in the Swiftness of ^^e Blood; and the principal Hinderance, and
ordinary Cause of the Suppression, to ^onsist in its Slowness. So that it does
not ^^em possible, on the Principles of this Au^^or, to explain how the Flowing
of the ^erms is procured by Nature alone. The ^econd Reflection I have to make
is, That the Fluids attenuated, bruised, and broken; by the Force of
Emmenagogues, do not so strongly oppose the Action of the Solids; the Blood
rendered supple, flowing, and docile, by these Medicaments, suffers itself to
be led, subdued, and jerk'd along by the Vessels, which, finding no more, as
before, an invincible Obstacle in the gross and compact Mass that the Remedies
have reduced and subtiliz'd, recover their Ease, resume their Vigor, and set
themselves at Liberty* Whence we see, that the Emmenagogues at the same Time
that they set the Bloo^ at large, set also the Vessels at their Ease too. Now,
being at their Ease, it is evident, that they are not so liable to b^ broken;
yet the Blood, upon which the Remedies act, might be so abundant, tha^ it could
not swell and rarify, without forcing the Canals to burst: In this Case, if the
Medicines melt and rarify it, it seems tha^ they will infallibly occasion the
breaking (...) the vascular Tunicks, which, as they cannot stretch any further,
must needs crac^ But we have observed, that the Blood, a^riv'd to such a Pitch
of Abundance, to such (...) Degree of Grossness, is not fit to be wroug^ upon
by Attenuants, because these can la^ no Hold of it: We have observed, in the
Circumstance, the Usefulness, and even the Necessity of Bleeding, to set the
Attenuan^^ at Work; therefore, in an excessive P^thora, in an extreme
Viscidity, Emmen^gogues, being equally as impotent as the Vessels, are as
little able to do any thing as these are. That which hinders these from
strongly contracting, hinders also those from fastening upon the thickened
Humors; whence it seems to follow, that the Blood cannot apply even the
Velocity which it receives from the Emmenagogues to break the Vessels; because
the Remedies cannot animate it so much as it should be, but with the Assistance
of the elastick Vessels. They do not indeed import Fluidity; but this is not
progressive Motion, the Motion of Circulation, which is not to be obtained but
by the systaltick Virtue of the Vessels. The Blood attenuated by Emmenagogues,
may well become Fluid; but it cannot acquire Velocity, save only by being
pushed, beaten, and jerk'd along. According to Dr. Friend, the Stroke of the
Blood is that which makes its greatest Strength: Now, the Stroke, that is to
say, the Briskness of the Shock, the Violence of the Percussion, does not
precisely come from the Fluidity; but, because the Fluid is strongly struck
upon by the Solid, which Blows it again retaliates, and, in its Turn,
re-buffets the Solid; therefore, if the Vessels were flat and unactive, in
Torture, and in Captivity, and the Fluids left to the sole Action of the
Attenuants, these Fluids would not receive Force enough wherewith to strike
upon the Solids; they would acquire but an indolent Fluidity, only a Disunion
of their Parts, a Dissolution of their Mass, incapable of any great Effects;
they could not contract that Impetuosity necessary to give Strength to their
Blow, Briskness to their Shock, Power and Force to their Percussion. Our Author
himself deduces the Velocity of the Blood from the vehement Pulsation of the
Heart, and of the Arteries; a Pulsation produced, as he says, by the Affluence
of the animal Spirits: Whereas, these animal Spirits themselves can be nothing
but the Work and Effect of the Spring of those Parts that agitate and push them
to the Degree of Fineness which they have. Therefore the Velocity of the Blood
is the Effect of the Expulsion of the Vessels; wherefore, it cannot make Use
thereof to break them: Therefore, if Emmenagogues excite the Flux of the
Menses, this cannot be by the Velocity which they impart to the Blood; but
rather by the Swelling, the Rarefaction, the disorderly Turgescence which they
produce therein; by the Means of which the vascular Tunicks give way, not to
the Force of the Percussion, but to the Excess of their own Dilation. Another
Difficulty might be started against me; the Vessels, in the Effort they make to
drive on with Swiftness and Percipitation the Blood subjected to their Power,
may they not break themselves? Are they not even more liable to be broken,
being active than unactive; by Exercise, than Indolence; by Fatigue, than
Repose? Are not they who labor hardest, most exposed to the Misfortune of
bursting Veins and Arteries? Have not we seen Vessels broken by the Shocks of a
violent Cough, and the cruellest Hemorrhages produced by the Heat of a burning
Summer? It is not therefore strange, that the uterine Vessels, though vigorous
enough to animate the Blood, should yield to the Blow of which themselves are
the Cause; and their Vigor, far from fortifying and defending them against
their Burst^ng, only renders them more proper, more fit and disposed for it. I
own the Vessels may be ^roken by their own Pains and Fatigue; but ^t must be
also confessed, that it is by Accident when this Misfortune happens, and that
these are Cases for which none undertakes to give ^nvariable Rules, and
Geometrical Demon^trations, such as Dr. Friend has attempted to give us; there
is too much Uncertainty in the Rupture of the Vessels; and it is too fortuitous
a Case, to draw and deduce thence an Effect ^o sure, so constant, so natural,
so regular, as the Phenomenon of the Monthly Courses. Besides, the Rupture of
the Vessels is not a thing so common as one imagines; bleeding at the Nose,
spitting of Blood, Accidents very frequent and vulgarly attributed to Ruptures,
don't so much denote broken Vessels, but rather such as meet discharging
Canals, that terminate in the Sanguines; and do not so much declare the
Extravasation of the Blood, as its Passage into the Emunctories. Why, indeed,
so few Ruptures in the slenderest, tenderest Fibers within the Body, which are
remote from Places of Discharge, whilst we discover so many and so often just
by the Issues, near the Excretories, and in the Blood Vessels, most within the
Reach of the Outlets, most known and best remarked? This Observation justly
intimates that which is attributed to the Rupture of the Canals, is usually but
the Effect of the Intrusion of the Blood into the Lymphaticks. These seem to me
the strongest Objections that can be made against me; and the proper Answers to
be made to them: Dr. Freind's System, therefore, cannot be defended, and still
lies under the same Difficulties.

Yet, after all, cannot flatter myself, that I have, with any Solidity, taken up
so learned a Man as Dr. Friend: What I have hitherto advanced I look upon it
rather as a Web of Objections to be answered, than as a Criticism to be
redoubted: If I have not attacked my Author with Advantage, I shall at least
have the Glory of having studied him with Application. It is always good to
betake ourselves to the best Authors, it is pleasant to contemplate their
Beauties; and even when we attack them unsuccessfully, yet don't we apply
thereto, without reaping an Advantage. But, should my Objections be made with
some Foundation, I would not take it amiss to be compared to a rebellious
Child, who battles its own Nurse, because, by her succulent and
well-condition'd Milk, she has supplied him with the Strength to do it.
Fostered by the Reading of Dr. Friend, imbued with his Lessons, improved by his
Knowledge, enlightened by his Light, I have made use thereof against himself. I
own, I should have had no Success in engaging him, if I had not improved by
studying him; if I had not gathered my Knowledge from reading and meditating
him; and if, before I made War upon him, I had not learnt my Discipline under
him. If we gain a Victory over good Authors, it is because themselves supply us
with the Means to gain it.

FINIS.

