SOME OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE PLAGUE: Occasioned by, and with some
Reference to the late Ingenious Discourse of the Learned Dr. MEAD, CONCERNING
Pestilential Contagion, And the METHODS to prevent it.

By a WELL-WISHER to the PUBLIC.

DUBLIN: Printed by and for GEORGE GRIERSON, at the Two Bibles, in
Essex-Street. 1721.

A Short Introduction TO THE Following OBSERVATIONS.
THE Compiler of the ensuing brief Collections, having met with several
Particulars in the most approved Authors that have wrote upon the Subject of
the Plague, which he conceived might afford some agreeable Entertainment to the
Curious, and tend to the further Illustration of some Parts of that excellent
Discourse whereunto they have a Reference, and also be of some general
Advantage in case divine Providence should for our Sins visit us with that sore
Distemper, does here offer them to the View of the Public, hoping that the
many Defects will be excused and forgiven, which will be easily discerned in so
Inaccurate a Composure, put together in great Straits of Time, by One, who
pretends to little more than barely to perform the Office of an Index, in
pointing at some Things which occurred to him in turning over Books that he
thought worthy of some Notice; and that his honest Intentions will be taken in
good part by all Candid Ingenuous Readers; and that such as have greater
Abilities and Opportunities will be excited to apply their Thoughts and Studies
more closely to a Subject which seems to challenge their Attention in a more
than ordinary Manner at this Time, and will oblige the World with the
Discoveries that they shall make in this Part of Nature, wherein the Lives of
Men are so much concerned.

SOME OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE PLAGUE, etc.
AS to the Original of this direful Scourge of Mankind called the Plague, I
find the most learned Physicians are much divided in their Opinions concerning
it, and those who have searched very far into the Secrets of Nature do yet
ingenuously acknowledge themselves to be very much at a loss about it. The
great Dr. Sydenham freely and fully confesses his own and his Brethren's
Ignorance in this Matter, and that not without a Smart Reflection upon such as
pretend to know more than their Neighbors, in this and other Particulars of
the same abstruse Nature. In Chap. 2 d. Page 71. of his Works, he thus
expresses himself. At vero quae, qualisque sit, illa aeris Dispositio a qua
morbificus hic apparatus promanat, nos, pariter ac complura alia circa quae
vecors ac arrogans Philosophantium turbanugatur, plane ignoramus. Words so
severe and so discouraging to any Enquiries of this Kind, that I shall choose to
leave them as I find them.

I must here indeed freely own that I am much pleased with the Piety and
Ingenuity of the learned and diligent Diemerbroeck, who after a large Recital
and Examination of the several Hypotheses that had been advanced before his
Time concerning the Origin of the Plague, and after weighing the Arguments and
Reasons brought by their respective Patrons for the Support of them, declares
himself wholly dissatisfied with them all, in the eight Chapter of his first
Book and the Annotations thereon; and after all, he has Recourse to the (...)
of the great Hippocrates, (the Father and Prince of Physicians,) and endeavors
to make it appear that something supernatural or preternatural is to be
understood thereby, and that That ancient Sage (though guided only by the Light
of natural Reason) intended to signify by that Term, somewhat sent down from
angry Heaven, as a just Punishment for the Wickedness of Men.

But it may not be improper to add something under this Head from that great
Christian Philosopher, and (while he lived) illustrious Ornament of the Royal
Society, Mr. Boil, never to be mentioned without a Preface of Honor. This
Curious and Critical, but Sober and Modest Enquirer into the Powers of Nature,
and Operations of Second Causes, in his Occasional Disquisition concerning the
Original of the Plague, wisely chooses the middle Way, between those who recur
wholly to supernatural Causes, and those who impute all to natural Ones, in
their Accounts hereof: He observes, in his Experimental Discourse concerning
the Insalubrity and Salubrity of the Air, Page 50. etc. That the Sacred
Writings expressly teach that some Plagues have been in an extraordinary Manner
inflicted by God, particularly That which in David's Time swept away in three
Days Seventy Thousand Men. But He seems to think that it is carrying the Matter
too far to infer from hence, or to affirm positively that All are so. I have
sometimes suspected (says he, Page 52.) that in the Controversy concerning the
Origin of the Plague whether it be Natural or Supernatural, neither of the
contending Parties is altogether in the Right, since it is very possible that
some Pestilences may not break forth without an extraordinary Interposition of
Almighty God, provoked by the Sins of Men; and yet other Plagues may be
produced by a tragical Concourse of merely natural Causes. But we are not to
think that by this last Expression He meant to exclude the Superior Agency or
Superintendency of the First in any Case; for no Man can express a more
becoming and awful Sense of, or an higher Reverence for the Cause of Causes,
than this great Genius does in all his Writings; and I could heartily wish that
He were more generally imitated herein by the Virtuosi of the present Age, and
that a more explicit Reference to Divine Providence were to be found in all
their Researches into Nature: And I cannot but hope that it would very much
contribute hereunto, if our Modern Wits would seriously read and consider that
excellent Treatise called the Christian Virtuoso, written by this Noble Author.
But to return from this (I hope not unuseful) Digression: As to Mr. Boyle's
Opinion concerning the Rise of Ordinary Plagues, it is in short This: He
inclines to think that the Malignant Disposition of the Air whereby the Plague
is propagated, if not first produced, is imputable to some Kind of Subterraneal
Expirations, and particularly to Arsenical Fumes; but as to this He is far from
being Positive, or Dogmatical: What He offers to render this Conjecture
probable, they that please may see, in his Discourse of the Air, as to its
Unhealthfulness or Healthfulness, already mentioned. Thus far as to the Origin
of the Plague.

What the Learned Dr. Mead advances, about the Beginning of Page 4. of his
Discourse, in these Words; [Nor do I think that in this Island particularly,
there is any one Instance of a Pestilential Disease among us of great
Consequence, which we did not receive from other Iufected Places:] is perfectly
agrecable to the Opinion of the celebrated Sydenham, who observes, that to the
evil Disposition of the Air, which proceeds (according to Him) from a latent
unknown Cause, there must be joined the Reception of some (...) or Infection
flowing from some Plaguey Body, and received either immediately by a near
Approximation to it, or else mediately by the Means of some Fomes transmitted
thencefrom into something apt to receive and retain the same, and transferred
therewith to distant Places; until by the great Number of infected Bodies, the
Air receives such a Taint, [or rather is so charged and loaded with Poisonous
Particles] as suffices to propagate the Contagion to some Distance, without any
other Spark to kindle the spreading Fire. The Substance of this may be seen in
Page 72. of his Works.

In Page 7. the Doctor briefly mentions that most terrible Plague which carried
Death over the greatest Part of the then known World, about the Middle of the
fourteenth Century, the History of which being very remarkable (especially if
all the Circumstances related by Authors of considerable Note be true) I shall
present the Reader with a somewhat larger Narrative of it, as very proper to
affect us with a pious Awe and Fear of the Wrath and Vengeance of a righteous
God, and also to give us a melancholy and humbling Representation of the horrid
Degeneracy of humane Nature, and the desperate Obstinacy of irreclaimably
Wicked Men. Mr. Boil in Page 69. of the forementioned Discourse has given a
brief Account of this prodigious Pestilence, from that excellent French
Historian Mousieur de Mezeray, who (as he tells us) relates in the Life of
Philip de Valois, that the Plague which happened in France in the Year 1346,
was so Contagious and Destructive, that scarce a Village or even a House
escaped uninfected by it: He adds, that this Pestilence began two Years before
in the Kingdom of Cathay, by a Vapor that was most horribly stinking, which
brake out of the Earth like a Kind of Subterraneal Fire; and devoured above 200
Leagues of that Country, even to the very Trees and Stones, and infected the
Air in a wonderful Manner: From Cathay (says he) it passed into Asia and
Greece, thence into Africa, afterward into Europe, which it ransacked
throughout. Thus far Mr. Boil from Mezeray, in whose Account the Date of the
Year seems to have been mistaken, or 1346 misprinted for 1348, or 1349. For by
Dr. Mead's and the following Account, it began in Cathay, (the Northern Part of
China) in 1346.

Besides what I have quoted from Mr. Boil, I shall entertain the Reader with a
more Circumstantial Relation of this most fearful Calamity which I met in
Kircher's Chronology of the most remarkable Plagues that are recorded in
History, annexed to his Scrutinium Physico-Medicum contagiosae Luis, quae
Pestis dicitur. The Substance of what he writes is this; That in the
Poutificate of Clement the sixth, Charles the fourth being Emperor, there raged
a most cruel Pestilence, the worst that ever was, scarcely the third Part of
Mortals being left alive. It so prevailed every where, that God seemed as if he
would destroy all Mankind by a general Ruin, as of old in the universal
Deluge. Villanius tells us that it had its first Rise in the Upper Asia, and
particularly in the Kingdom of Cathay, in the Year 1346, from a most filthy
Smell supposed to proceed from a certain Fiery Body, which either fell from
Heaven, or broke out of the Earth, and extended its horrible and terrifying
Bulk to so vast a Compass, that it consumed every thing that stood in its Way,
Animals, Houses, Trees, etc. for the Space of fifteen Days Journey: And some
most filthy little Beasts furnished with Feet and Tails, [by this Description
they seem to have been a Sort of Neuts or Lizards] as also Worms, and a small
Sort of Snakes in a numberless Multitude, fell at the same Time from the Air
upon the Earth, the Stench and Putrefaction whereof infected the whole Region.
A Pestilence hence arising invaded the adjacent Places, and then spread it self
to the remoter Cities and Provinces, so that it depopulated all Asia.
Afterward it penetrated into Egypt, Greece, and Italy. Thence it passed over
into France, Spain and England, and at length into Germany, Poland and all the
Northern Parts, with the Destruction of innumerable Persons. In the City of
Florence only, Villanius says there perished 60000, but St. Anthony makes them
100000; and although such a dreadful Contagion was sent among Men by the
avenging Hand of God for their enormous Wickedness, yet after so great a
Calamity those that succeeded and came greedily into the Possession of such
rich Inheritances as the deceased had left, grew worse and more wicked than
ever. Many Prodigies preceded this Plague in Asia, such as horrible Clefts, or
swallowing Gulfs in the Earth exhaling a poisonous Wind or Vapor, and other
Things of the like Sort. Thus far Kircher. Page 247.

N. B. If that Part of the Story be Fact concerning the Worms, Snakes, etc.
which are said to have fallen from the Air, it seems to me much more probable
that they were hatched from Eggs that had been formerly laid on the Earth, or
Leaves of Plants, by Animals and Insects of that Kind; the Disposition of the
Air, which was filled with the Steams of that horrible Meteor before mentioned,
perhaps greatly contributing to their Generation or quickening in such vast
Numbers.

This most fearful Plague is also taken Notice of by many other Chronologers.
Alstedius relates that at Lubeck it carried off 90000. And that of the
Barefooted Monks in several Parts it destroyed so great a Number that in the
whole their Dead amounted to 1244434; and the same Particular is mentioned by
Hogelius in his Horologium Historicum, Page 632. who tells us also, that at
Erford there died such Multitudes that the burying Places in the City being all
filled with Carcases, 12000 were laid in eleven Caves under the Mountain called
the Red Mountain. Page 650.

Many other destructive Pestilences before and after this are mentioned by
Historians, and several of the later Ones particularly described by Learned
Physicians, as That at Delft in 1557 by Forestus, That at Vicenza by Massaria
in 1576, That at Nimeguen in 1636 by Diemerbroeck, and the last very terrible
One at London in 1665 by Hodges, which they that please may consult.

In Page 11. toward the End, the Learned Author just mentions the Opinion of
some who have thought that the Pestilential Contagion or Infection is
propagated by the Means of Insects, whose Eggs may easily be conveyed from
Place to Place, and produce the Disease when they come to be hatched: But he
observes withal that this is a Supposition grounded upon no manner of
Observation, and that there is no Need to have Recourse to it. As to this
Hypothesis of poisonous Insects giving Rise to the Plague, it has been lately
insisted on by Mr. Bradley, who in his new (and indeed very ingenious and
useful) Improvements of Planting and Gardening Reprinted here, has published a
Letter from Mr. Robert Ball containing several curicus Observations which seem
to him to render it highly probable; and in a small Tract lately published by
Mr. Bradley, the Title of which is, The Plague at Marseilles considered, he has
pursued the same Conjecture, and transcribed the Substance of what is to be
found in the Book and Letter already mentioned upon the Head of Insects.

This Notion seems to be much akin to that which was advanced by Athanasius
Kircher (that famous Enquirer into Nature, sufficiently known to the learned
World by his Voluminous Labors) in the former Century, and he seems to have
taken the Hint from the noted Cardan, for in Page 52. of his Scrutinium Pestis,
he tells us, that Cardan relates that in his Time (who flourished about the
Middle of the six-teenth Age) there was a most cruel Pestilence at Milan,
arising (as he conjectures) from an infinite Number of little Worms: Of these
Vermiculi Kircher discourses very largely in his Treatise of the Plague,
bothbefore and after thenowmention'd Quotation from Cardan; and particularly in
Page 141. he speaks of the Plague as something which he hadshewn to be
Animated, because of those Animalcula which hetakes to be often, if not always,
the Seminary thereof, concerning which he thus expresses himself; Sunt autem hi
Vermiculi Pestis propagatores, tam exigui, tam tenues et subtiles, ut omnem
sensus captum cludant; etc. The Substance of what he says is this; That these
little Worms which he supposes to be the Spreaders, if not wholly the Breeders
of the Plague, are so exceeding Small that they are to the Sense and Sight
imperceptible and undiscernable, unless it be by the Help of the most exquisite
Microscopes, and for their Smalness may be called Atoms, but they increase so
prodigiously that their Numbers are beyond Compute. These Vermiculi, as they
are generated (Ex putredine) out of Corruption, so they are easily thrust forth
by all the Pores of the Body in which they are, together with the sweaty
Vapors, and are carried along with the slightest Motion of the Air in vast
Swarms, like the Motes that may be seen plying to and fro in the Sun Beams,
when they shine into a Room that is somewhat obscure through a Hole. These
Insects (he supposes) do tenaciously adhere to any Thing they meet with, and
insinuate themselves into the smallest Pores of Bodies; and to render all this
more probable, he says, that he has often found the Blood taken from Persons
laboring under Putrid Fevers so full of Worms, within an Hour or two after the
Emission, as even astonished him, from whence he persuades himself that Man may
(not only after his Death, but even) while alive be plentifully stored with
such Vile Animalcules, though the Sense cannot discern them, and that, on this,
as well as other Accounts, Job speaks as he does. Chap. 17.14 [I have said to
Corruption thou art my Father: to the Worm thou art my Mother and my Sister.]
He goes on to show that this Verminose Brood, which (according to his Opinion)
is cast forth in very great Quantity both from the Living Bodies of such as are
infected with the Plague, and from the Carcases of the Dead when they begin to
putrify, being received into the innermost Parts of Linen and Woolen Clothes,
and the like, are there cherished, and therewith conveyed to distant Places,
and that this is the first and principal Seminary of the whole Contagion; as he
endeavors to show more at large: But such as desire further Information as to
this Particular, must have Recourse to the Book it self, for it would require
much more Time and Room, than can be allowed at present but to make an
Abridgement of his copious Discourse about it in several Parts of the said
Treatise. This Hypothesis must be acknowledged very plausible and ingenious, if
it be built upon a solid Foundation, and if such Vermiculi as these have a real
Existence in Rerum Natura, and be not the Creatures of astrong Imagination
only. That there are Worms very often found in Humane Bodies is indeed
sufficiently evident, and what none are ignorant of; and that Worms have been
sometimes vomited up by Persons sick of the Plague is attested by Authors of
good Credit: Diemerbroeck mentions one Instance of this Kind, Hist. 52. Page
306. where he relates this Particular concerning a Patient of his, that he cast
up by Vomit above 60 small Worms as red as Blood, soon after which he died; but
he adds that he never saw the like in any other Person. We are also told that
Multitudes of such Worms were found in some dead Bodies that were opened at
Marseilles, which lived and moved very briskly when put into Wine or Brandy,
but were soon killed with Oil and Juice of Lemons; yet after all, Kircher's
Vermiculi and Mr. Ball's and Mr. Bradley's Insects do not seem to be of the
same Species with these Worms, for the former are represented as so many
animated Atoms, scarcely discoverable by the Help of the best Glasses, whereas
the latter were sufficiently obvious both to the Sight and Touch. For my part I
shall not go about to determine any Thing in this Matter, but shall leave it to
the nicer Examination of the most Learned Philosophers and Physicians, who are
capable of penetrating much farther into the Mysteries of Nature than I can
pretend to be. Only I cannot forbear adding that I do very much doubt while
these Insects (which by the way cannot be the same with Mr. Bradley's Blighting
Insects, for then we should have a Plague every Time we have a Blight, which in
and about this Place is almost as often as we have a Spring, as the Gardeners
know to their Sorrow, by the so frequent Destruction of their Fruit: I say I do
much doubt, while these Insects) remain in such an invisible State, the
Hypothesis that is founded upon them will also remain precarious, and as little
demonstrable as others that have been formerly proposed. To which I shall
subjoin this one Remark more; That the Generation of Worms or any other
Animals, ex putredine, which Kircher seems to take for granted, is now almost
universally exploded, and no such Thing as Spontaneous or aequivocal Generation
allowed to the meanest Insect: but it is agreed among the Learned, that the
smallest Creatures do (as well as the greatest) proceed ex Semine, and have
Parents of their own Kind by whom they are propagated; and this indeed is what
Mr. Bradley no where denies, and I do not say but that his Hypothesis may be
consistent with the univocal as well as aequivocal Generation of such
Animalcula. Yet give me Leave to observe once more, that the gradual Progress
which the Pestilence usually makes, does not seem very well to agree with the
exceeding Lightness of these volatile Insects, and upon considering this
Circumstance one would be inclined to imagine, that whatever is the Fomes of
the Contagion, it must be something more ponderous, though no less poisonous than
these venomous Insects are supposed to be; and I cannot well conceive how it
would be possible by all the Care or Precaution in the World, to prevent the
spreading of the Distemper from one End of a Country to the other, in a very
short Space of Time, if it be carried about by these Nimble, Light-heel'd,
Living Atoms, who would make nothing of flying over Lines and Rivers, or
fastening upon the Men themselves that stand to guard the Passes, and in short,
must go which Way soever they are carried by every Puff of Wind or Stream of
Air. But I shall not insist further at present upon this or any other
Difficulties that occur to my Thoughts with Reference to this Hypothesis. I
shall leave these little Creatures to shift for themselves as well as they can,
but if they be such Plaguey ones as they are represented, I desire to have no
experimental Acquaintance with them, though I own that the Notion and Speculation
of them may be agreeable enough to an inquisitive Genius; and the Objections
which lie cross in my Mind against this Hypothesis of Plague-producing Insects,
may possibly be answered to Satisfaction by the Patrons of it, how insoluble
soever they may at present appear to me.

What the Learned Doctor suggests in Page 22, 23, etc. against the old but
unhappy Custom of shutting up Infected Houses, is so Humane and Charitable, and
supported with such Solid Reasons, that I cannot but hope it will be so far
attended to by our wise Legislators in all future Regulations they shall see
fit to make, that such a cruel and hurtful Method may be effectually prevented,
and that if at any time it should please God to visit us with that sore
Distemper, the Terror and Danger of it shall not be augmented by Treating the
miserable Sufferers with such unreasonable rigor as manifestly tends to sink
and overwhelm their Spirits (which ought to be kept up as much as possible, as
in other Diseases, so more Especially in this) and to dispose them for nothing
(humanely Speaking) but to Despair and Die. And I cannot doubt but that such
timely Provision will be made by the Public, of convenient Lazarettoes for the
Reception of the Sick upon the first breaking sorth of the Dire Disease in any
large City or Town, as may (through the Blessing of Heaven) prove an happy
Means of stopping the Progress thereof in its beginning.

As to the Alternative which the Doctor proposes in the close of his excellent
Performance concerning infected Goods, that if they be not burned they may be
buried deep in the Ground; I cannot but think the Latter of these Methods, (or
the sinking them in the Sea or in some deep Water, where it can be conveniently
done, to prevent digging up) to be much the more eligible, and the safest as
well as least offensive manner of destroying them; for I have a vehement
suspicion that by the burning of Infected Clothes and the like, the Venomous
Effluvia or poisonous particles adhering to them may be carried along with the
Smoke, and the fatal (...) or Fomes being Volatilized by the Fire may fill all
the Circumambient Air, and instead of restraining may greatly propagate the
Contagion. This I very well remember, that in some parts of England it is a
generally received Opinion that the burning of Clothes taken from a Person that
dies of a very Malignant Small Pox, greatly tends to spread the Distemper; and
wicked Nurses, who desire to make work for themselves, are said to practice
this very Method to accomplish their barbarous Designs; and when I lived in the
County of Suffolk, I was informed that when that Disease was in the Town of
Ipswich (about 25 or 30 Years ago) a certain barbarous Nurse did early in a
Morning, (that she might not be known) at the head of one of the principal
Streets, put fire to an heap of Old Rags and Bed Clothes that had belonged to
some poor People who Died of that Distemper, and the Smoke driving along the
Street, several that passed by betimes complained of a very offensive smell,
and the next News was that almost all that had not formerly gone through that
Disease in that whole Street, were seized with it in a very few days. And if
this Method of Burning be so pernicious in the Case of the Small Pox, I doubt
there is too much Ground of fear (according to the common way of arguing a
Minori ad Majus) that it may prove still more fatal in the Case of the Plague;
But this I humbly submit to the Consideration of the Learned in Philosophy and
Physic.

As for proper Prophylacticks or Preservatives from the Plague, the Doctor has
not offered much upon this Head, and seems to despair of the discovery of any
Specific of virtue sufficient to fortify nature against the assaults of such
a Malignant Disease. After the mention of some general and very useful rules to
be observed by way of prevention, and just hinting at a few particulars,
especially the use of Wine Vinegar in small quantities, [which, with his
Conserva me Domine, is said to have been the Antidote of the famous Sylvius] He
does in the 35. Page, recommend leaving the infected place as the Surest
Preservative, which is the same with the Counsel that Ramazzini gives in his
late Dissertation concerning the Plague at Vienna, about seven Years ago; Page
469. of his Works; where he thus expresses himself. Vt quod sentio proferam,
illud unicum perplacet, quod vulgo de tribus compositum appellatur, i. e, de
celeri fuga a loco infecto, de profectione ad longinquas regiones, ac tarda
reversione; quo remedii genere sapientiores quoque Medici uti consuevere. The
Sum of which is, That, to speak his Mind freely, he thinks the Method of
prevention prescribed by the old Adage, Mox, long, tarde, cede, recede, redi,
to be the Best, i. e. to get away soon, to go away far, and to return back
slowly; which he says is a remedy that the wisest Physicians themselves are
wont to make use of upon this Occasion: But how proper advice soever this may
be to those who are in such Circumstances as render them capable of following
it, yet there are, alas, great numbers to whom this will seem an hard saying,
as being by them impracticable. The lower sort of People, poor Mechanics and
Tradesmen that have nothing to live upon, but the Profit of their Mean
Employments, must be forced to Stick by the Stuff; they have no Country Seats
to repair to, and few of them have any such Friend as will be free to receive
them into their houses in the adjacent Villages. If therefore any thing could
be found out that would, if not always, (which indeed is not to be expected)
yet pretty often prove a Defensative against this dreadful Enemy, it would
certainly be a great and most acceptable Service to Mankind to acquaint the
world therewith. But as to this, I (being no Physician my self) have little to
offer but what has occasionally occurred to me in perusing some of the best
Medical Books, written by Authors of the greatest Name and Note, who have
themselves been eminent Practitioners, and particularly have had courage enough
to Visit the Sick in places where the Plague has raged with the greatest
Violence. Among these, Diemerbroeck and Hodges are the Chief in the Class of
Modern Writers; the Former being Physician at Nimeguen during the severe
Pestilence that made such fearful havoc there in the Year 1636; and the Latter
at London in 1665, when near an hundred thousand Persons were cut off by this
Flagellum Dei. As to Diemerbroeck, that great Judge Mr. Boil says, that he
prefers his Book of the Plague to any that he had ever read of that Disease,
Page 81. of his Treatise of the Air, already mentioned; and indeed He seems to
have communicated his Observations to the World with a great deal of ingenuous
plainness and fidelity. It would take up too much room to transcribe the half
of those Receipts, which he proposes from himself and others by way of
prevention, in his Treatise of this Distemper; I shall therefore only give my
Reader the Substance of what he sets down in the 12 Chapter of his 2d. Book, the
Title of which is De meo ipsius Vivendi modo, where he faithfully relates what
Course he himself took for his own Preservation, while he attended the Sick
during that sad time in which the Plague raged at Nimeguen. The Sum of what he
says I have endeavored to contract as follows: He tells us, that he avoided as
much as he could all vehement Perturbations of Mind: That he lived intrepidly,
or without Fear: That it was the same Thing to him whether he visited the Sick
of the Plague or of any other Distemper, and that he as readily served the Poor
gratis, as the Rich for a Reward; He adds, that if at any time he found himself
somewhat shocked, (which in that doleful Season, wherein there was scarce an
House in the whole City that escaped the Contagion, must needs happen now and
then) in such a Case he refreshed his Spirits with three or four Draughts of
Wine; That being frequently disturbed in the Night, and much tired in the Day
with walking up and down from Patient to Patient, he was forced to Sleep an
Hour after Dinner, when he could best spare the time, though he dissuaded
others, who were under no such necessity, from sleeping in the Day: That as to
Diet, he used Meats of the most easy Digestion, avoiding Swine's Flesh,
Herrings, and the like, which he had found hurtful to him: That his Drink was
ordinary Ale and Small White Wine, of which he sometimes drank to Cheerfulness,
but never to Excess; That he kept his Body open, but not too loose, only so as
to have One or Two Stools in a Day: That Once or Twice in a week at Bedtime he
swallowed One or Two of his Anti-pestilential Pills described in Chap. 9. [the
Composition of which shall be subjoined to this Account] That beginning to
visit the Sick between Four and Five in the Morning, he could then take
Nothing, his Stomach perfectly loathing both Meat, Drink, and Medicine, so that
he was constrained (though against his own Judgment) to go forth fasting, and
could do no more than (after committing himself to God by pious Prayers) to
chew some Grains of the lesser Cardamom; That about Six a Clock in the Morning
he took a little Treacle, or Diascordium, or eat a little Candied Orange Pill,
and very frequently three or four Bits of Candied Elecampane: About Eight he
breakfasted upon a Piece of Bread with Butter and Greencheese made of Sheeps
Milk, drinking a Glass of Ale, and now and then (but not daily) he took a
Draught of Wormwood Wine about Nine: At Ten he smoaked a Pipe of Tobacco, and
after Dinner Two or Three, and the like after Supper, and sometimes Two or
Three more between Meals, and if at any Time he found himself affected with the
Ill Smell of the Sick, he presently had Recourse to the same Remedy, which he
says (he found by his own Experience) as well as always thought to be the most
effectual Preservative, so that the Tobacco be of the best Sort. He adds, that
upon the ceasing of the Plague he left off Smoking, not willing to accustom
himself to it, lest he should turn its laudable Use into a detestable Abuse.

The Composition of the Anti-pestilential Pills is as follows.

Take the Roots of Butter-bur, Carline Thistle, Dittany, Angelica, Elecampane,
of each anOunce; and Half; of Gentian one Dram and Half; of the best Rhubarb,
one Ounce and Half; of Zedoary one Dram: Of the whitest Agarick, Half an Ounce;
Take also the Herbs Scordium, the lesser Centory, Rue, of each Half an Ounce;
Carduus Benedictus, six Drams; and of the Flowers of Staechas one Dram and an
half; as also the Seeds of Citron and Oranges, of each one Dram; of all these
make a gross Powder, which steep for two or three Days in two Pounds and an
half or three Pounds of White Wine, then boil it for about a Quarter of an
Hour, and strain it very strongly in a Press, and afterward strain itagain
through thin Paper: In the strained Liquor dissolve three Ounces and an half of
the best Aloes, and three Drams and an half of clear Myrrh in Drops: Let the
Moisture evaporate in a China Dish 'till a Mass of Pills can be made of the
Remainder. These Pills (says the Author) we have found to be of great Use in
Time of the Plague.

Thus far from the accurate Diemerbroeck; who has also given us no less than
120 Histories of so many particular Persons afflicted with the Plague, in whose
Cases may be seen all the various Symptoms of that sore Distemper, with the
Remedies proper to each of them, which are well worth the Perusal of such as
understand the Language wherein they are writ.

Proceed we now to the Learned Dr. Hodges, who by the Appointment of the
Government continued in London during that most dreadful Pestilence, which
raged there in the Year 1665, of which he afterward published an Historical
Narration with the Title of (...), or an Account of the Plague: in which he
treats concerning the Rise and Progress, the Causes, Signs, and Cure of the
Contagion, and also relates his own Manner of living in that Time of Danger.
What I shall observe from him shall be only the few particular Directions which
he gives concerning such Things as he judges proper to be done by Way of
Precaution; omitting the general Ones relating to the timely providing
Lazaretto's, keeping Houses and Streets clean, and the like, which Dr. Mead has
perfectly well recommended. As to particular Preservatives from the Plague, Dr.
Hodges gives us several Receipts, of which I shall only set down Two that are of
easy Preparation, and perhaps of equal Virtue with the more pompous Forms. The
first is what he calls an Electuary for the Use of the Poor, the Composition of
which is in Page 229, of his Book, viz. Take Conserve of Wood Sorrel and Goats
Rue, of each half a Pound; of Marigolds, one Pound; London-treacle, three
Ounces; Bole Armoniack vitriolated, four Ounces; with Syrup of Lemons as much
as is sufficient; make an Electuary; two or three Drams of which may be taken
Morning and Evening. The other is an Haustus said to be of great Virtue. Viz.
Take Water of red Roses camphorated two Ounces, the best Vinegar one Ounce, in
which dissolve two Scruples of the best Bole Armoniack; add three Drams of
simple Syrup of Scabious, mix them for a Draught.

I do the rather mention this because the Use of Vinegar seems to be much
approved by the Learned Dr. Mead. Diemerbroeck also highly commends Vinegar,
and says that he had seen many poor People better preserved by taking a
Spoonful thereof every Morning, than some Others were by the most costly
Remedies. Page 170.

Among other Antidotes against the Pestilential Contagion, Dr. Hodges does
particularly commend Canary of the best Sort, of which he frequently drank
while he attended the Sick, and found it of singular Use to himself and others.
His Time of drinking it was at Dinner, and a little before Bedtime; but as to
the Smoking of Tobacco, which Diemerbroeck so much extols, He speaks very
doubtfully of it, and seems to have had an Aversion to it, and to suspect that
the Pestiferous Vapors may be sucked in with the Smoke; and in fine he prefers
his good Spanish Wine very much before it, and this so far as appears was the
Antidote he chiefly trusted to among the Internal Ones. But then as to External
Defensatives against this deadly Enemy (rejecting the many Amulets vulgarly
prescribed, the most of which he thinks to be useless, and some noxious,) there
is one which he greatly commends as the most powerful and effectual of all
others in this Case, and that is the having of large Issues; for Instance, one
in the Left Arm, and the other in the Right Leg, capacious enough to contain
five or six Pease. The more to enforce this Advice, he does solemnly affirm,
Page 240. that as often as he went into Places that were more than ordinarily
Infected, he found that Part of his Arm in which the Issue was, exceedingly
pained, and that thin, undigested, Bloody Matter would flow from it, with a
very smart Pungency, and that upon this Warning given him, he presently had
Recourse to proper Alexipharmicks. It seems plain from hence even to Sense and
ocular Demonstration, that the Virus, the Venom, and Poison of the Contagion
did work off in a great Measure by Means of this Sort of Evacuation. I shall
only add under this Head, that Diemerbroeck does also much commend this Remedy,
and observes that many who had Issues escaped the Plague at Nimeguen, and of
those that had it, a considerable Number recovered speedily upon taking a
Sweating Medicine, and he mentions several other eminent Physicians that had
found the happy Effect of such Issues in the Course of their Practice. Page
150. etc. He observes also that many of those that had Sores about them escaped
the Plague, and he tells us that Galen of old made the Same Observation.

I shall now in the Close of this Collection just mention One or Two
Preservatives recorded by the Excellent Mr. Boil, toward the latter end of
his discourse of the Air beforementioned. The former of these is in Page 86.
which was communicated to him by one whom he calls an ancient and very
experienced Physician, to whose care a great Pesthouse was committed. This
Person owned to Mr. Boil, that besides ardent Prayers to God, and a very
regular diet, his constant Antidote was only to take every Morning fasting a
little Sea Salt dissolved in a few Spoonfuls of Fair Water: Mr. Boil adds that
he thinks it desirable that Notice be taken of all Remedies that have been
found by good Trials available against the Plague; for since Pestilences are
various in their Kinds, it is very possible that their appropriated Remedies may
be so too; and that Medicine may prove successful in one, which has proved
ineffectual in another. The Noble Author adds to this, That the said
Consideration forbad him to pass by the following Particular, Viz. That a very
Learned Physician having recommended to him the Herb called Galega, or
Goats-rue, at that time little noted in England, as a most effectual Antidote
against the Plague, he caused it to be cultivated in a Garden, and when the
Pestilence raged most, having some of it by him made up with a little Sugar in
the form of a fine green Conserve, he sent it to Two infected Persons, who, by
the divine blessing on it, both of them recovered. He also takes notice of the
great virtue of this Herb against the Bitings of Venomous Creatures: It may be
eaten in its entire Substance as a Salad, or the Conserve or Syrup may be
taken, or the Juice newly expressed, which he thinks better than the Syrup or
Conserve.

Thus I have finished what I had to offer to the Public concerning the Plague,
and the most proper Antidotes against it which I have met with in my little
reading. I shall only add, That after all, our principal-Trust and Confidence
must be in the Goodness and Mercy of Almighty God, through the Merits of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and it greatly concerns all Persons to search
and try their ways, and turn unto the Lord with their whole hearts. Let the
Means and Instruments or Second Causes of this terrible Calamity be what they
will; whether it owes its Origin to Subterraneal Steams and the Expirations of
Noxious Minerals, (as Mr. Boil conjectures) or, to a pestiferous Aura,
proceeding from a peculiar, and (in a Sort) corruptive alteration of the
Nitro-aereal Spirit, (as Dr. Hodges thinks) or, to prodigious Swarms of
invisible Venomous Insects, (as Kircher and Mr. Bradley imagine) Or Lastly, to
an unhealthy Constitution of the Season, and Disorder in the Air Occasioned by
excessive Heat and Moisture, (as Galen taught of old) which evil Constitution
is heightened and rendered more Malignant by the Stinks of Stagnating Waters, by
Putrid Exhalations from the Earth and from dead Carcases lying unburied, which
fill the Air with Contagious Particles, and so being Sucked in with the Breath
taint in their passage the Salival Juices, which being Swallowed down into the
Stomach fix the Malignity there, as the Learned Dr. Mead observes, Page 7. and
11. of his Discourse: I say whether this Dreadful Disease owes its Origin to
any one, or (which is more probable) to a Concurrence, and Complication of
Secondary Causes, Yet still it becomes us to look higher, and to reverence
Divine Providence as the first and principal Cause. The great God has said,
Amos 3.6. [Shall there be Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?] Sword
and Famine and Pestilence are what He expressly calls, His sore Judgments. (
Ezekiel. 14.21.) The Earth, the Water, the Fire, the Air, all the Elements, and
all their Actions are at his Beck, and under his steady Government, and it is
not improbable that he does employ Angels, as the Ministers of his Justice, to
inslict deserved Punishments, and particularly this of Pestilence upon a guilty
People: Possibly he may by their invisible Hands scatter through the Air those
fatal Miasmata, those Malignant Venomous Atoms, and Poisonous Effluvia, the
Seeds of Contagious Distempers, that carry Death and Destruction all around; to
which Thought some Divines have been led by some passages in Holy Writ that
seem in their opinion to look this way. Be this as it will, it is certain that
the Almighty is the principal Agent, who orders and overrules all Inferior
ones, and therefore whatever or whoever be the Instruments, it is with him that
we have chiefly to do, it is from him that we have more to Fear or Hope than
from all the World besides, and therefore it must needs be both our Duty and
our Interest to fly to his Mercy-Seat, to Humble our selves before him, and to
make our earnest Supplication to him, either to Preserve us from such Public
desolating Calamities, or to prepare us for them. And a general Humiliation,
Repentance, and Reformation is one of the most hopeful Means of Preservation
from this terrible Distemper, whereby the Wrath of an offended God is revealed
from Heaven against the Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of a guilty World. Yea,
if God should see fit to send it among us, such Repentance and Amendment,
joined with a true Faith in the Mediator, would best prepare us for it, give us
the greatest Courage and Comfort under it, and the most happy Issue out of it,
and even Death it self would be to us no other than a Passage to a better Life.

For the Direction of the curious Reader that desires to consult the Authors
themselves which I have used in this Collection, I here subjoin a Catalogue of
them with the Editions made use of by me.

Alexandri Massariae Vicentini Practica Medica venetiis. 1622. Fol. Editio
quarta.

Petri Foresti Alcmariani Opera omnia. Rothomagi. 1653. Fol.

Athanasii Kircheri Scrutinium Physico-Medicum Contagiosae Luis, quae Pestis
dicitur. Romae. 1658. Quarto.

Isbrandi de Diemerbroeck Tractatus de Peste Noviomagensi. Amstelaedami. 1665.
Quarto.

Bernardini Ramazzini Opera. Londini. 1717. Quarto.

Alstedii Thesaurus Chronologiae. Herbornae Nassoviorum. 1637. Editio Tertia.
Octavo.

(...), sive Pestis apud Populum Londinensem grassantis Narratio historica.
Authore Nathanaele Hodges. Londini. 1672. Octavo.

An Experimental Discourse of some unheeded Causes of the Insalubrity and
Salubrity of the the Air. By the the Honorable R. Boil. London. 1685. Octavo.

Zachariae Hogelii Horologium Historicum. Lipsiae. 1704. Editio secunda. Octavo.

Thomae Sydenham Opera. Land. 1705. Editio tertia. Octavo.

Such as desire to see more of the Nature and Cure of the Plague may consult
Burnet's Thesaurus Medicinae Practicae a Daniele Puerario Auctus in duobus
Tomis. Genevae. 1678. Octavo. In which he has collected the principal Remedies
made Use of against this Distemper by the most eminent Physicians of the two
last Ages, such as Forestus, Fabritius Hildanus, Rodericus a Fonseca, Felix
Platerus, Joannes Crato, Gregorius Horstius, Raymundus Mindererus, Helmontius,
Mercurialis, Kircher, Diemerbroeck, Hodges, and others. Or they may have
Recourse to Etmullerus, and the Collections of the Voluminous Manget, in his
Bibliotheca Medico-Practica in four large Folio's. His Collections relating to
the Plague may be found in the Fourth Volume, printed at Geneva, School. who to
the Authors already mentioned has added some later ones, as Barbette, Sylvius,
Willis, etc.

Add to the Preservatives, that Garden Rue eaten with Bread and Butter, or made
up into a Conserve is much commended against the Plague, and if this were added
to the Conserve prescribed in Page 23. I should think it would be to the
Advantage thereof. The very Smell of this Herb, though ungrateful, is said to be
an Antidote.

Candied Elecampane Roots are also much praised by Diemerbroeck.

To what is observed in the Fourth Page from Dr. Mead and Sydenham concerning
the Plague's not springing up of its self in this Part of the World, I shall
beg Leave to add as a Close to this Paper; That although it may be true that this
Distemper never breaks out in these Countries unless the Seminary of it be
brought to them from some infected Place, yet the Disposition of the Air may
sometimes be such as to render it more apt than ordinary to receive into it the
Poisonous Fomes, and to propagate the same, which is what these Learned
Gentlemen do expressly acknowledge. The Use which I would make of this
Reflection is, that the warm Constitution of the Air which has prevailed for
the greatest Part of the present Winter, and is generally thought to be too
favorable to the Seeds of this Disease (whatever they are) should put us upon
Doubling our Diligence, in the Use of all proper Means to guard against the
Admission of any Thing from Abroad, that may give the least Suspicion of its
harboring such a Fatal Mischief: for should any Thing of this Kind be conveyed
to us, it may have the like unhappy Effects with a Little Spark, falling into a
great Deal of Dry Tinder, that may quickly diffuse it self, and break forth
into a Flame not easy to be extinguished.

In Magnis voluisse sat est.

FINIS.
N. B. In DUBLIN there is Published a Second Edition, of Dr. MEAD's Discourse
Concerning Pestilential Contagion.


