ANALYSIS OF BELLOSTE's PILLS, AND THEIR Manner of operating in the Human Body,
by the Author himself; with full DIRECTIONS for Using of this Remedy.
IT is a Thing universally known, that England has, of old, been the Nursery of
Men of Learning, and that she is still, this very Day, the Mother of Arts and
Sciences; and amongst those that this flourishing Kingdom has cultivated with
an inimitable Care, Physic is placed in the first Rank. It is to the
celebrated Professors of these famous Universities, as well as to the Knowledge
and Experience of the excellent Practitioners of this Country, that it owes its
finest Luster: Therefore all the World ought to preserve a respectful and
grateful Memory for those great Men who have published so many learned Works,
and have made Discoveries upon the human Body of a prodigious Utility for the
Preservation of Mankind, and the Cure of the Sick.

Yet one cannot deny that there has been, in foreign Countries, consummated
Practitioners, who having exercised their Profession, during a great Number of
Years, and who having had favorable Opportunities of employing the happy
Talents which Providence had bestowed upon them, with a sound Judgment and
particular Lights, have, upon a long Experience, made Discoveries, and found
out Remedies unknown to the preceding Ages; whereby the Glory they have
acquired by their Art, is not less considerable than the infinite Service done
to the Public by their Studies, and indefatigable Assiduity.

I think I may be allowed to speak particularly on this Subject, as being the
Son of a Father so much distinguished in Surgery, by a successful Practice of
Sixty Years, which made him worthy of the most eminent Employments, that a Man
of his Profession could aspire to, and whose Writings are translated into most
of the Languages of Europe; who having found out the salutary Effects that
Mercury produces in the Human Body, spent three Quarter Parts of his Life in
discovering the safest Manner of taking it successfully, and without the Danger
of any Accident, be it ever so small.

He has been so lucky in his Search, that he has performed with this Mineral a
vast Number of Cures, most of them of a different Nature, which, in the
Beginning, have even surpassed his Expectation; and he has observed, that all
these good Effects could be attained only by crude Mercury, being first very
well cleansed of all its terrestial and arsenical Parts whereof it is loaded,
coming from the Mine, tied by a Curb that hinders it from sublimating, and
mixed only with gentle and suitable Purgatives, without any Preparation by
Fire, which is always very dangerous, as he has judiciously expressed it in his
second Volume.

He has had the most favorable Opportunities to try it, having been, for a
long Time, Surgeon Major of the Hospitals of the French King's Army in Italy,
and afterward first Surgeon to Madam Royal at Turin, during twenty-six Years,
till that Princess died; where he has made, with the Mercury thus prepared,
several Cures, which have been admired by all the Court; and where his Person,
and what he did, will not soon be forgotten.

He was sufficiently satisfied that Mercury (whereof he alone has found the
true Preparation) is a rare Gift of Providence, capable to obviate so many
different Distempers; since (in the Manner he gives it) it has the principal
Qualifications required for curing all the Disorders occasioned by the bad
Constitution of the Blood, which are to evacuate superfluous and peccant
Humors, to absorbe the Sharpness of the Blood, and of the Humors, and to
dissolve the Thickness thereof. It tempers besides the Ferments of the Stomach,
when they are in a manner viciated, and puts them again in a Condition to make
a good and perfect Digestion, which is the Spring of Life and Health; and, on
the contrary, when it is adulterated, it is the first Cause of most Distempers
that attack the Human Bodies.

In effect, when this vital Function comes to be disordered by the Misusage
that is made of Food, which is the most common, How many Diseases is it not
subject to breed? When there can only result, from the Concoction of bad
Ailments, a sharp or viscous Chylus, and sometimes both, which can only produce
a Blood of the like or same Nature.

From the Thickness of the Blood and of the Humors, comes a great Number of
Infirmities; as the Obstructions in the Entrails and the Kernels, a Slowness in
the Circulation; from thence the Retardment, and sometimes the Stoppage of the
Secretions, and of the Distributions of the nutricious and other necessary
Juices, for the Preservation of the animal Economy.

Their Sharpness is not less dangerous, as being very often the Occasion of the
Disorders abovementioned, and the Cause of Overflowings, and the Thickenings
of the Lymph in the different Parts of the Body, the Irritations of the Nerves,
and the Contractions of the Fibers.

These two Causes, well considered, it is easy to conceive, that from them
proceed most of the Disorders that afflict Human Body; as the Tumors in the
Liver, the overflowing of the Choler in the Surface of the Body, or its
spilling in the Ventricle; the Obstructions of the Kernels in the Mesentery, or
in Women's Breasts, Schirrus or Cancers, Oppilations, Green Sickness, stopping
of the Courses, hysterical Vapors, spilling of Milk in Women after their
Lyings-in, Pains in the Head, Swimmings in the same, Megrim, Scurvy, Fevers,
St. Anthony's Fire, Surfeits, Consumption, Oppressions in the Breast, and
Shortness of Breath, Sciatica, Rheumatism, the Gout, the Griping of the Guts,
Nephretick Cholick, the Gravel, the Strangury, the Hypochondriac Disease or
Melancholy; as likewise, the King's Evil.

All this, at first Sight, seems to be a Paradox; yet every thing rightly
considered, and weighed with Judgment, and without Prejudice, it shall plainly
be found, that one and the same Cause produces many different Effects, if it be
observed, that all these Distempers are occasioned by the Sharpness or the
Viscosity of the Humors, which slide into different Parts of the Body, as they
find them disposed to receive them.

The Worms, to which Children more particularly are very subject, by the ill
Use that one allows them to make of Fruit and Sweat-Meats: There perishes a
prodigious Number of these innocent Creatures, by Causes very often unknown,
and for want of giving them the proper Remedies to destroy those dangerous
Insects.

There are also Disorders which the Depravation and the Licentiousness of the
Age have rendered too common, produced by a Ferment, which is extraneous, sharp
and malignant, and on which, though there be much to be said, I choose to be
silent.

As my Father has labored all his Life for the public Good, in the first
Volume of his Book, entitled, The Hospital Surgeon; he has given a short and
easy Method of Curing, in a short Time, all Sorts of Wounds: In the second
Volume, he has mechanically explained the Virtues of Mercury, and its Manner of
operating on the Mass of Blood in the Human Bodies. Those that shall think fit
to read it, they shall find an Account of a Distemper of each Specie of those
that he cured with this Remedy. The Learned and the Curious may have Recourse
to it; my Intention being only to give an Idea or a general Notion of the
Effect which this Remedy produces, to those that are not at hand for to provide
themselves with the said Book, or who will not give themselves the Trouble of
reading an entire Volume.

This Remedy ought not to be considered separately, neither as a single
Purgative, soft and gentle, nor singly, as a Mineral Liquid, and penetrating;
but as a specific Remedy compounded of both, in a Manner which renders it
almost universal, since it perfectly tempers the bad Quality of the Blood, and
of the Lymph, and that it evacuates without Trouble or Alteration, the
superfluous and peccant Humors by the usual Ways of Nature.

It is certain, that the Roundness of Mercury, and its Activity, are the two
main Qualities that we are to consider in the Effect which it produces on the
Mass of Humors, since its Weight is only of some Consequence, when it is
united in a certain Volume, as it is given in the Twisting of the Guts.

When it comes then to dissolve in the Stomach, the most volatile Part of
Mercury that separates by Means of the Ferments and the Heat of the Stomach,
slips, with the Chylus, into the lacteal Veins, that are carried together, and
by the same Way into the Mass of the Blood; there, by its Roundness, and its
natural Motion, which is augmented by the Vibration of the Arteries, it
circulates into the Blood and lymphatick Vessels, dividing it self, as we
conceive it, into infinite small Parts, it runs through all the capillary
Veins: If it meets in its Way any Obstacle in the Glands or Entrails, it
strikes and beats against it, it loosens Part of it, until at last, by often
repeating the same Action, it makes it self a free Passage, and thereby
procures to the Humors a clear Way, which, to them, for a long Time, was
become impracticable: By its continual and successive Rubbings, it blunts the
Points and Edges of the Acids that it meets with, it wastes and divides them,
it drags and hurries them out of the Body, partly by Transpiration, by Urine,
and by Stools, by assistance of the proper Purgatives, fit to dissolve and
evacuate the slimy and ropy Matters, and all extraneous Bodies out of the
Stomach and Intestines, apt to breed various Distempers, which, though slight
and insignificant in their Beginning, are sometimes of a very dangerous
Consequence.

Thus it is that I have often seen Persons cured which were afflicted with
inveterate Obstructions in the Entrails of the lower Belly, and in the
Mesenterick Glands, which were become schirrous, and which permitted the
Passage only to the Part of the Chylus, the most waterish and less nourishing;
and the Blood not receiving sufficient Reparation, in proportion to the Losses
it makes by the Transpiration, the Urine, and other Evacuations, there had
ensued a total Leanness in the Body, which evidently tended to a Consumption.

It is after the same manner of operating that this Medicine has often cured
old Ulcers, Tetters over all the Body, hysterical Convulsions, with seventeen
Relapses in a Day, old Stoppages of the Courses, spilling of Milk after
Delivery, which had obliged the Woman to keep her Bed for Eight Years,
Looseness and Disenteries, Gripings of the Guts, Nephretick Cholicks, with Loss
of Blood by Urine, Hypochondriack Diseases three Years old, Gouts, Rheumatisms
all over the Body, and venereal Distempers so old and obstinate, as to have
resisted all the other usual Remedies: These are Cures publicly known, which
have been performed in France by the Help of my Pills, even with the Knowledge
of the Physicians of the Court.

It is to be observed, that when these Sorts of Distempers are new, they are
cured with an admirable Quickness and Facility; but when they are of an old
Date, and inveterate, one must not flatter one's self; they cannot be cured but
by a long Course of Physic, more or less, according to the Age and the
Constitution of the Patient, who, rather than to discontinue, ought to go on
with a very moderate Dose, which purging him only three Times, or thereabouts,
may not give him any Trouble, or discourage him, the Distemper, at last, will
be conquered: For it is ridiculous and absurd, to imagine that one Dose or two
of any Physic whatsoever, may cure a Chronical Disease.

How can one expect to render, in a short Time, fluid, a thick and viscous
Blood, to dissipate old Tumors, to melt inveterate Obstructions, to render
balsamic sharp Humors, to restore the animal Secretions, return to the Fibers
their natural Springiness; in short, to restore all the Parts of the Body in a
perfect State of Health? Which can only be performed by a good Dissolvant and
Absorbent, taken in a suitable Dose, during a sufficient Time, for to fulfill
these Indications.

It only belongs to Quacks to promise very speedy Cures; and therefore the
Success never, or seldom answers; that is, the right Name and Character of
those Impostors, who, by dint of Untruths, gather Riches, deceiving the easy
Credulity of an ignorant Public, so far as to falsify good Remedies, and to
sell them under the Name of the true Author: So that one cannot take Precaution
enough in making use of Remedies, and especially specific ones; one ought to
get them from the Author himself, or from Persons of Probity, who are in
Correspondence with him.

Those that shall make Use of this Remedy, shall find by Experience, that
insensibly it expels out of the Body all that is foul, malignant, and
extraneous, and that it averts the Infirmities of Old Age.

It is by that Means that my Father has lived above eighty Years, without
feeling those Ailments to which one is subject at that Age: But, at last being
dead, if he could not leave me his Learning, and his happy Talents, he has made
me the Heir of his Secret, of his Honesty, and of his unalterable Uprightness,
as well as an invincible Hatred for Fraud and Falsehood.

The whole Dose, which is one Pill, is not to serve for a Rule to every Body;
for it must be altered and proportioned to the Age, and to the Constitution of
the Patient, as well as to the Effect it produces: For an Instance; if it
purges four or five Times, it is enough; if eight or ten times, it must be
lessened one Quarter, one third Part, or one Half; and if it purges only two or
three Times, and but little at a Time, then the Dose must be increased in
Proportion: Yet, if it should sometimes happen in lusty Persons, full of gross
Humors, that a common Dose should occasion a plentiful Evacuation, one must
not be discouraged; for then, the more the Physic operates, the more one feels
the Illness decreasing, and one's Strength augmenting. But as there are
likewise some Constitutions, the Humors whereof are difficult to be evacuated,
and that even one Dose and a half purges them but little, the Patient then must
take a Glister the Day of a second taking, or the Day following; it softens the
viscous and clammy Humors, it loosens the Fibers of the Intestines, and
empties what has been put in Motion by the Pills; and it is very proper to make
Use, now and then, of such a Remedy.

In Cases of extraordinary Cholick, as the Twisting of the Guts, the Dose must
be doubled, and even trebled; but in this last Case, if the Intestine should be
fallen into the Scrotum, the taking of the Pills must be suspended, until it be
reduced again into the Abdomen.

If the Gout be newly come, or just growing upon one, it radically cures it:
But if it be of a long Standing, it puts off the Fit, and lessens the Violence
of the Pains.

As this Remedy is very safe in its Operation, it is given with Success, and
without the least Danger to Childbearing Women, and to Nurses, in a moderate
Dose; for it increases and cools their Milk.

Those Persons that use to take a Purge by Precaution, will be entirely
satisfied with the Effect of this Remedy; for it evacuates the Phlegm and the
Choler to Admiration, without Pains, Gripes, or any Alterations; it creates an
Appetite, and promotes Sleep.

A Proof that it is no violent Medicine is, that it has cured Children under a
Twelvemonth old, of a Fever, caused by bad Food, and Convulsions, occasioned
by the Worms; observing to give them only a little Dose proportioned to their
Age, divided into small Parts, that they may swallow it in Lumps or Grains,
without being dissolved before taking (for the Dissolution of this Physic must
absolutely be made in the Stomach) and to that Purpose one may wrap the Pills
into Wafer-Paper, roasted Apples, Sweetmeats, or the like.

They are taken every other Night, two or three Hours after a very light
Supper, with Mutton-Broath, Water Gruel, or Tea, as hot as one can drink it.
The next Day one may take again some such hot Liquid, in order to help the
Operation of the Medicine. It also may be taken in the Morning fasting, which
is better than at Night.

One is not obliged to keep in Bed nor the Chamber, nor to observe a very
rigorous Diet; but only to take Care not to catch Cold; to forbear all Acids,
unripe Fruit, all Things made of Milk, Pork Flesh, and salt Meat.

These Pills will never spoil, if kept in a Box, in a temperate Place.

They are to be Sold only at Mrs. Clocker's, a Packer, at the Blue Flower-Pot,
in Great Bell Alley, Coleman-street, and at Mrs. Giles's, a Milliner, at the
Blue Ball near the Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, at twenty Shillings per Box
with eight Doses, or ten Shillings the half Box with four Doses, with these
Directions.

N. B. All Sold at any other Places are Counterfeits.

The HOSPITAL SURGEON, by Augustine Belloste, etc. is Sold by John Clarke,
Bookseller, under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange, Cornhill.

FINIS.

