THE South Sea SCHEME EXAMINED, etc.

(Price Threepence.)

THE SOUTH SEA SCHEME EXAMINED: AND The Reasonableness thereof DEMONSTRATED.

By a hearty Well-Wisher to PUBLIC CREDIT.

The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCCXX.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
WERE the following small Performance answerable to its Design, or the Spirit
which gave Birth to it, there would require no Apology to justify the
Publishing of that to the World, which at first was only intended for private
Information: However, it is hoped that the Intention with which it was wrote,
being to contribute to the Support of Public Credit, will make some Atonement
for that Deficiency, recommend it to a candid Acceptance from the Public, and
obtain a Pardon for those Mistakes which may be found in it; especially when
the Reader is assured, that there is no Untruth designedly advanced, and that
the whole is both wrote and published without the Direction, Privity, or
Assistance of any Person whatsoever, but the Author.

THE South Sea SCHEME EXAMINED, etc.
THE calamitous Circumstances in which too many are involved, from the present
languishing State of Public Credit, is a Matter of too great Importance to be
passed by unregarded: It calls upon every Person who bears any Regard to the
Interest of his Country, to exert himself in the Support of that Credit wherein
no Briton can be unconcerned.

The Design of the few following Leaves is not to reflect but to examine, not
to flatter but to state, not to aggravate but to reconcile every Man to his own
Interest; by making an impartial and fair Examination into the South Sea
Scheme, and endeavoring to demonstrate the Reasonableness thereof, after the
best Manner which a Person furnish^d only with such Materials as have been
published, is enabled to do.

In order therefore, to conceive as clearly as possible, of the real Value of
South Sea Stock, as well as of the Reasonableness of the Terms given to all the
Proprietors of the Debts redeemable and irredeemable, I shall pursue the
following Method.

First, I shall lay down a short State of the several Branches which compose
the Debts already subscribed, or to be subscribed into the South Sea Stock: and
those are commonly distinguished as follows, viz. Stock to be allowed. l. l.
Long Annuities per A^num, 607705 13354100 (...) 171^, 121^70 1703380 R^^^^^
(...) Cent. 15924218 15924218 30981698

The Government allowing the Company 20 Years Purchase for every long Annuity,
and 14 Years Purchase for every short One, gives them a Liberty to create
30,981,698 l. or thereabouts, new Stock, and thereby to enlarge their Capital
till it amounts to 42,184,408 l. Stock or thereabouts. Thus much for the
particular Branches to be taken into the Stock.

Secondly, Let us enquire into the Amount of the South Sea Stock, provided the
whole Debt was subscribed upon the Terms proposed: And upon this Head, it will
be necessary to distinguish, between that Part of the irredeemable Debt
subscribed last April at 375 l. and the remaining Part thereof, together with
the redeemable Debt to be taken in at 400 l. per Cent.

Subscribed in April at 375 l. per Cent.

l. per Annum. Stock. 42734^. Long Annuities at 7 Years Purchase, 2991380
48132.9 per Cent. for each 90 per An. 350 Stock, 187180 15988. Lottery 1710 --
about 60000 3238560 10 per Cent Midsum. Dividend, 323856 Total Stock given for
the above Annuities, 3562416

It is to be observed, that the last mentioned Capital may not be perfectly
exact, by reason no Distinction is made between the 99 Years Annuities, and the
14 per Cents, they both being included under one Head of Long Annuities, and
the like Years Purchase in Stock given for each. The same is to be observed of
the Lottery 1710, where Blanks and Prizes are likewise included under the same
Head: But this causes little Difference in the Capital Stock given for either,
but only in the Bonds.

Remaining Part of the Debts, as well Redeemable as Irredeemable, to be taken
into the Stock at 400 l. per Cent.

Sto^k. (...) Ann. L. (...) Long Annuities, 8 Years Pur^ (...) in Stock,
1,922,912 (...) per Cents, at 4 Ditto, 139,680 (...) Lottery 171^, at Ditto,
104,898 ^ Redeemables at 5 and 4 per Cent. at 420 l. 3,981,054 (...) given for
the above 6,148,553 (...) Dividend of ^ l. per Cent. thereon, ^14,855 (...)
Debts, 6,763,408 (...) given at 3^5 l. per Cent. 3,562,416 Total Stock given
for the whole Debt, 10,325,824

Hence it is evident, that about 10,325,824 l. Capital Stock, or thereabouts,
would redeem the whole 30,981,706 l. of Debts, supposing the same to be all
subscribed into the Stock upon the beforementioned Terms: The Bonds excepted
in this Account. L. The Original Capital including the Midsummer Dividend,
12,322,972 Stock given for the Debts, 10,325,824 Total Amount 22,648,796

Supposing the whole Debt to be thus subscribed, what remains of the Stock, may
either be sold, or divided out, in such manner as shall be most advantageous to
the Company: Of which the underwritten Sums have been sold upon the following
Considerations, viz. In each Sum the 10 l. per Cent. Dividend is included.
Quantity of Stock sold. Total Value L. 1st Money Subscription 2,477,200
6,756000 2d 1,^50,000 6,000000 3d 5,500,000 20,000000 4th 1,375000 5,000000
Agreed with the Bank 1,038,125 3,775,000 Total Stock sold 12,040,325 sold for
41,531,000 Former Capital 22,^48,796 Total Cap^tal 34,689,121

Here it must be observed, that the South Sea Capital, at present, does not
amount to 34,689,121 l. by reason the whole Debt is not subscribed in; so that
probably there may be yet 10 Millions of Stock to dispose of.

Having thus far given some View of the Amount of the South Sea Capital, I
shall endeavor to demonstrate the Reasonableness of the Terms given by the
South Sea Company, as well as the Advantageousness of accepting them. To do
which in the most convincing manner, I shall beg Leave to set a Valuation upon
the respective Funds, at the Time the Company first began to engage to redeem
them: And then show the Advantage accruing from the Exchange.

First, as to the Valuation of the respective Funds.

The Long Annuities never exceeded 25 Years Purchase, and were looked upon as
very dear at that Rate, it bringing but 4 l. per Ann. to the Purchaser.

The 9 per Cents, and Lottery 1710, sold for about 14 Years Purchase.

The 5 and 4 per Cent. Redeemables cannot be valued at above Par, as they were
liable to be paid off at any time without Notice. And I believe it is pretty
certain, that the Proprietors of the 5 l. per Cent. Funds would gladly have
accepted of 4 l. per Cent. rather than have been paid off.

If this be a fair Valuation, let us examine into the Reasonableness and
Advantageousness of the Terms given by the South Sea Company.

And First, Every Long Annuitant, who subscribed in April last, received in
Stock, Bonds and Money, after the Rate of 36 Years Purchase for an Annuity,
which till then was not worth more than 25 Years Purchase.

In like manner, every Proprietor of the 9 per Cents, or Lottery 1710, received
in Stock, Bonds, and Money, about 19 Years Purchase for what would not have
sold for 15.

As to the Terms at present given to the 2d Subscribers, they receive in Stock
after the Rate of 35 Years Purchase.

And the 9 per Cents, and Lottery 1710, receive in Stock about 18 Years
Purchase.

Every Proprietor of the Redeemables receives 110 l. Stock for 390 l. (Interest
being allowed to them to Michaelmas 1720.) which in Effect is taking the Stock
at 354 l. 1^ s. per Cent.

It will easily be perceived from what is advanced, that the South Sea Stock is
valued at 400 l. per Cent. which perhaps may be objected to, considering the
Price it sells for.

And here it must be confessed with the greatest Concern, that unreasonable
Jealousies, groundless Fears, the most unaccountable Apprehensions, or rather
an universal Infatu^^ion, has so far seized on Mankind, as to run down the
Stock much below its Value and beyond all Expectation, to the un^^ing of many,
and the Loss of most: Although every Proceeding, which has in some measure
occasioned these Losses, is far from being justifiable; yet a great Number of
em must be attributed to the Misconduct of those upon whom they have fall^^
S^^e arising (...) from an insatiable Des^^ (...) g^^ing Treas^^^, not thought
of by our Ancestors, and thereby have neglected (...) Oppo^^^^^^ which would
have (...) Happiness (...) to themselves and their Families, while others by
purchasing vastly beyond what their Abilities could make good, are plunged into
irretrievable Ruin.

But to come to the main Point, which is to endeavor to show the due Value of
the Stock.

I hope no one will, in this Particular, too strictly adhere to Hudibras's
Rule, which implies that nothing is worth more than it will bring: For at
present it must be said, that the South Sea Stock sells at a Discount, and
below its Value.

For were the Stock to be sold only at 50 l. per Cent. and every Man should
determine to dispose of his own, it would be impossible to find Purchasers for
it; and yet the Stock in Reality would be no ways the worse for it. And to
demonstrate this the more clearly: Suppose every Proprietor of a Landed Estate
should resolve to sell it, it would not be possible among our selves to find
Purchasers at 3 Years Purchase for the whole: Though every Man at present would
look upon an Estate at 20 Years Purchase, as a most extraordinary Bargain: And
yet no Man thinks the worse of his Estate, or would be induced to part with it
upon so small a Consideration.

To judge of the real Value of the Stock, must be by the Dividends, the Company
will be able to make upon the Stock, and the Continuance of them: And I hope to
make it appear, that the Stock is worth 400 l. per Cent. by showing that the
Company is able to divide after the Rate of 30 per Cent. upon their Stock, for
such a Number of Years, as will reimburse every Proprietor his full Principal
and Interest for every Share purchased at that Rate.

These Dividends are to be made good out of the Annual Sums payable by the
Government, and out of the Profits which the Company gain or make by their
Stock.

Their Profits arise three Ways, from the Stock already sold, the remaining
Part to he disposed of, and the Loans upon the Stock.

I presume it is not to be expected from a private Person to point out at what
Times, in what Proportions, and at what Rates the remaining Stock should be
disposed of, that being submitted to the Ability and Management of those
Gentlemen whose P^^^^^ (...) is: But this I beg leave to say, that (...)
payable by the Government to the Company, the Profits already made, the
Advantages of their Loans, and a prudent Disposition of what remains, will
enable the Company to divide 30 per Cent. upon their Stock, for such a Term of
Years as will reimburse every Proprietor his full Principal and Interest.

As for Instance, every Long Annuitant subscribing 100 l. per Annum, upon the
first Proposal receives 254 l. per Annum, which if continued 14 Years,
Reimburses a Principal Sum of 2500 l. with Interest of 5 l. per Cent. thereon:
Which Sum was the just Value or Worth of his Annuity: So that the Subscriber
not only receives an annual Sum of 125 l. in Lieu of 100 l. but is a Gainer of
770 l. Capital Stock, and 575 l. in Bonds or Money, over and above the 2500 l.
by him subscribed.

Upon the last Proposal, every long Annuitant receives 264 l. for his
subscribed 100 l. per Annum; which gives the like Addition to his yearly
Income, and will reimburse the Sum of 2500 l. with 5 l. per Cent. Interest in
13 Years; and he be further entitled to 88^ l. Capital Stock without Bonds.

Every short Annuitant will, in 14 Years, be reimbursed the respective Sum by
him subscribed, the same being valued at 1^ Years Purchase, with Interest
thereon at 5^ per Cent. and be a Gainer of so much Stock or Bonds, as he
received for them.

As to the Redeemable Proprietors, they receive the Stock, as has been before
observed, at the Rate of 354 l. 10 s. per Cent* which bears Interest after the
Rate of about 8 l. 9 s. 3 d. upon the Sum subscribed* Which continued for 16
Years, will reimburse the Principal and Interest to the Proprietors at 4 l. per
Cent. and in 18 Years, a^ 5 l. per Cent. and they be Gainers of the Stock they
possess.

Whatever further may be thought upon for the Service of the Company, it is not
to be doubted but the Legislative Power will grant every thing reasonable, to
enable them to go through so great an Undertaking, as that of reducing the whole
National Debt.

Having gone through all the Particulars I at first proposed, and endeavored
to demonstrate the Reasonableness of the South Sea Scheme, as well as to show
the Advantages arising thereby; I beg Leave to address my self to every body,
in Defense and Support of the Public Credit; because the Evil being from our
selves, must by our selves be relieved.

I shall call upon every Body, because no Person is unconcerned, as every one
will find when it is too late, that does not exert himself in this Just and
National Cause.

Those who enjoy Favors from the Government, are first obliged by their
Authority, Example and Advice to engage themselves and all others over whom
they have any Influence in this just Cause. Those who receive no particular
Favors from the Government, but live in the quiet and peaceable Enjoyment of
their own, and profess themselves and would be treated as Friends to this
present happy Establishment, ought not to be unactive for its Support, much
less, if not necessitated, to make any Demand to distress the Public Credit.

Those not engaged in the public Funds, are as much concerned to support the
Credit of them, as those engaged, as all will feel the good or ill Effects of
their Support or Decay.

A Decay of Credit must unavoidably end in a Decay of Substance. The Farmer
will find no Market to take off the Produce and Effects of his Labor, and
consequently be unable to pay his Landlord. The Merchants will find no Demands
for their Commodities, and the industrious Manufacturer no Employment for his
Hands. As the Poor will increase, the Means of relieving them will lessen daily.

These are Circumstances which should awaken all of us to guard against them,
as they are more easy to be prevented than remedied.

Let us not join Hands to work out our own Destruction, and give up that Peace,
Trade and Wealth, which the united Power and Artifices of our Enemies has
hitherto in vain labored to rob us of.

Let no Man through unjust Fears or groundless Jealousies, lock up his Treasure
in his Coffers, and boast himself upon a Security which will prove imaginary:
Let every Man place his Strength in the Support of the Government, and the
Prosperity of his Country: And as there is no Attempt made to hurt us, let
every Man consider where such Interest is allowed, or such Security given for
Money, as in Great Britain? Where has public Faith ever been so inviolably
maintained? What greater Security can be desired, where all the public Funds
are appropriated, the Interest, Wealth and Credit of the whole Nation is
engaged to support, as it now is by the late happy and seasonable Agreement
between the Bank of England and the South Sea Company?

Upon the whole, as we are blessed with a wise and good Prince, a faithful and
able Ministry, and a Parliament capable and disposed to concert such Measures
as tend to the common Interest of all: Let us join our Endeavors to their
Resolutions, to retrieve the Difficulties we labor under; then will our Credit
soon revive, our Trade flourish, and we become a great, happy and powerful
People to all succeeding Generations.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Amount of the Bonds and other Debts, owing by the South Sea Company, being
unknown, no Notice has been taken of them in the foregoing Account: But they
are left to be accounted for, out of the future Profits and Advantages to be
made by the Company.

FINIS.

