LETTERS TO PARTICULAR FRIENDS,

BY WILLIAM SHENSTONE, Esquire From the Year 1739 to 1763.

DUBLIN: Printed for H. SAUNDERS, W. SLEATER, D. CHAMBERLAIN, J. POTTS, J.
WILLIAMS, and W. COLLES, Booksellers. MDCCLXX.

PREFACE.
THOUGH the Character of Mr. Shenstone, is too well known, and his reputation
as a Writer too firmly established, to require any further commendation, yet it
may perhaps be expected that some apology should be made for this volume of his
Works, containing Familiar Letters to some of his most intimate Friends.

To these who may think such an apology requisite, it might be sufficient to
say, that the reception which the former volumes have met with, affords the
strongest reason to believe that an addition to them would be very acceptable
to the Public; and that the author's talent in epistolary writing appears not
to have been inferior to that which distinguishes his other compositions.

But it may be objected, that, whatever their merit may be, Letters, not
intended for the Public, ought not to be published, and that an act of this
kind is a violation of private friendship.

This objection, it must be confessed, carries with it such an air of delicacy,
that the persons here concerned are very willing to give it all due attention.
At the same time they cannot but observe, that it will not hold in all cases,
and therefore must unavoidably be subject to some limitations -- that these
limitations must vary, as the circumstances of cases happen to vary -- and that
not to make proper allowances for such circumstances is highly unreasonable --
injurious to many who have deserved well of the Public by this very conduct,
and detrimental to the interests of Literature. It might perhaps be difficult,
and is by no means necessary, to enumerate these several limitations. It will
be sufficient in this place to say, that where neither the reputation of the
Writer, nor that of any other person, is injured, there the force of the
objection evidently ceases. And it is not only believed, on the most mature
deliberation, that this is the case in the present instance; but moreover that
the there are positive good reasons in its favor, respecting as well the
Writer's character in this species of composition, as the satisfaction and
entertainment of the Reader.

The encouragement which has been usually given to Works of this nature might
seem to make these observations unnecessary! But it was not thought sufficient
barely to shelter this publication under the sanction of such an authority; as
it is well known that the wantonness of curiosity has sometimes encouraged
design by no means justifiable: -- and it is as readily acknowledged that the
following Letters are deficient in many particulars requisite to excite that
curiosity, being neither written on popular subjects, nor addressed to persons
of rank and eminence in the world. They will not fail however to afford an
agreeable entertainment to such as can relish an animated display of the
various efforts of a fine imagination for a length of years, whether amusing
itself with rural embellishments, or occupied in other pleasures of learned
retirement, and a warm disinterested friendship. Such are the subjects of the
following Letters! and if any person should still retain a doubt concerning the
propriety of perpetuating them in this manner, he shall be finally referred to
the writer's own authority, who, in a letter dated October, 23, 1754, thus
expresses himself:

I confess to you that I am considerably mortified by Mr. W -- 's conduct in
regard to those Letters (meaning his own letters to that gentleman's brother;)
and, rather than they should have been so unnecessarily destroyed, would have
given more money than it is allowable for me to mention with decency. I look
upon my letters as some of my chef-d'aeuvres; and could I be supposed to have
the smallest pretensions to propriety of style or sentiment, I should imagine
it must appear principally in my Letters to his brother, and one or two more
friends. I consider them as the records of a friendship that will be always dear
to me, and as the history of my mind for these twenty years past. When it is
considered how seldom so valuable a collection of real correspondence is to be
met with, and how difficult it is to supply the want of it by a fictitious one,
it cannot be doubted that the Public will be pleased to see the loss here
complained of so well repaired, and to be furnished with such genuine examples
of the Author's style and sentiments, together with an authentic history of his
mind, for so long a space of time.

To conclude: The talents of this Author, on whatever subject they were
exercised, were so uncommon, and the fame of his little Ferme ornee, under the
conduct of a taste entirely original, was become so considerable, that every
specimen of the one, and every anecdote relative to the improvement of the
other, seemed too interesting to be buried in oblivion: at least, they were
thought so by those to whom the greater part of this Collection is addressed:
-- persons indeed confessedly partial to the Writer's talents, and interested
in his commendations; but at the same time persons neither so regardless of
their Friend's reputation, nor their own, as to have hazarded either, without
the strongest persuasion that their partiality had not imposed upon their
judgment; and that it was no indecent ostentation in them, by this public act,
to testify, that they esteemed it not only a peculiar felicity in their
fortunes, but likewise some degree of credit, to have enjoyed the pleasures of
such a friendship throughout so considerable a period of human life.

CONTENTS.
LETTER 1. TO Mr. JAGO, with a Song, and the Author's Sentiments on Musical
Composition. 1739. p. 1. LETTER II. To the same, in the Manner of Pamela. 1739.
3 LETTER III. To a Friend, too ceremoniously declining to purchase a Horse for
him. 1739. 5 LETTER IV. To the same, from, Town. 1740. 8 LETTER V. To a Friend,
from London, describing his Temper and Manner of Living there. 1740. 10 LETTER
VI. To the same at Bath, on publishing his Poem of The Judgment of Hercules.
1740. 13 LETTER VII. To Mr. JAGO, on the Death of his Father. 1740. 16 LETTER
VIII. To Mr. REYNOLDS. 1740. 17 LETTER IX. To the same. 1740. 19 LETTER X. To
the same. 1740. 20 LETTER XI. To the same. 1740. 21 LETTER XII. To Mr. JAGO,
from London, with Observations on the Stage. etc. 1741. 23 LETTER XIII. To the
same. 1741. 24 LETTER XIV. to Mr. --, on his taking Orders in the Church. 1741.
p. 26 LETTER XV. To Mr. GRAVES, on similar Taste and Manners. 1741. 28 LETTER
XVI. To a Friend, expressing his Dissatisfaction at the Manner of Life in which
he is engaged. 1741. 30 LETTER XVII. To the same. 1741. 31 LETTER XVIII. To Mr.
--, from The Leasowes. l741. 33 LETTER XIX. To the same, with an Invitation to
accompany him to Town. 1741. 35 LETTER XX. To the same, on occasion of printing
The School-mistress. 1741. 36 LETTER XXI. To the same, from Town, on the Death
of Mr. SOMERVILE, etc. 1741. 38 LETTER XXII. To Mr. GRAVES, on Benevolence and
Friendship. 1741. 40 LETTER XXIII. To the same, with Observations on SPENSER.
1742. 42 LETTER XXIV. To the same, with a Continuation of the same Subject. 44
LETTER XXV. To the same, on the Publication of the School-mistress. 1742. 46
LETTER XXVI. To the same, with a humourous Description of his Conduct with
regard to Form and Equipage. 1742. 48 LETTER XXVII. To the same, from Town,
with a Specimen of Plays and Politics. 1743. 50 LETTER XXVIII. To the same,
with various Schemes of Composition. 1743. 52 LETTER XXIX. To the same. 1743.
54 LETTER XXX. To Mr. JAGO, from London. 1743. 56 LETTER XXXI. To the same.
1743. 58 LETTER XXXII. To Mr. GRAVES, describing his Situation and State of
Health, etc. p. 60 LETTER XXXIII. To Mr. JAGO, on the same. 1743. 63 LETTER
XXXIV. To Mr. GRAVES, written in Hay-Harvest. 1743. 66 LETTER XXXV. To the
same, after the Disappointment of a Visit. 1743. 68 LETTER XXXVI. To the same,
on the Receipt of a Present of Prints. 1743. 69 LETTER XXXVII. To the same,
with Observations on Hypocrisy, etc. 1743. 72 LETTER XXXVIII. To a Friend, with
a Parody. 1744. 74 LETTER XXXIX. To Mr. GRAVES, on Social Happiness. 1745. 77
LETTER XL. To the same, with Observations on the Rebellion, and its probable
Consequences. 1745. 79 LETTER XLI. To the same, with Remarks on the Execution
and Behavior of the Lords Kilmarnock and Balmerino. 1746. 81 LETTER XLII. To
the same, with a new Theory of Political Principles. 1746. 84 LETTER XLIII.
Continuation of the same. 1746. 86 LETTER XLIV. To the same, on the Mixture of
Pleasure and Pain. 1747. 88 LETTER XLV. To the same, with Thoughts on Advice.
1747. 91 LETTER XLVI. To a Friend, from The Leasowes. 1747. 94 LETTER XLVII. To
the same. 1747. 96 LETTER XLVIII. To the same, with a Song. 1747. 99 LETTER
XLIX. To the same, after a Visit. 1747. 101 LETTER L. To Mr. JAGO, from The
Leasowes. 1747. 105 LETTER LI. To Mr. --, on his Marriage. 1748. 1^7 LETTER
LII. To Mr. Jago, with an Invitation to The Leasowes. 1748. 110 LETTER LIII. To
the same. 112 LETTER LIVE. To the same, with a Receipt to make Fame. 1748. 115
LETTER LV. To a Friend, disappointing him of a Visit. 1749. 118 LETTER LVI. To
Mr. Jago, from The Leasowes, on a rainy Evening. 1749. 120 LETTER LVII. To the
same 1749. 122 LETTER LVIII. To the same. 1750. 124 LETTER LIX. To the same.
1750. 127. LETTER LX. To C -- W --, Esquire. 1750. 129. LETTER LXI. To the same.
1750. 131 LETTER LXII. To a Friend, on various Subjects. 1750. 133 LETTER
LXIII. To the same. 1751. 135 LETTER LXIV. To Mr. Graves. 1751. 137 LETTER LXV.
To a Friend. 1751. 141 LETTER LXVI. To Mr. Graves, on the Death of Mr.
Shenstone's Brother. 1752. 145 LETTER LXVII. To C -- W --, Esquire. on the same.
1752. 148 LETTER LXVIII. To the same. 1752. 149 LETTER LXIX. To Mr. G --, on
the Receipt of his Picture. 1752. 151 LETTER LXX. To Mr. Jago, on their mutual
Misfortunes. 1752. 154 LETTER LXXI. To the same, 1753. 157 LETTER LXXII. To the
same. 1753. 159 LETTER LXXIII. To Mr. Graves. 1753. 162 LETTER LXXIV. To the
same, with Observations on Arms, Inscription, etc. 1753. 165 LETTER LXXV. To
Mr. Jago. 1754. 169 LETTER LXXVI. To Mr. Graves, on the Alternations of
Pleasure and Pain. 1754. 172 LETTER LXXVII. To the same, on the Death of Mr.
Whistler, 1754. 174 LETTER LXXVIII. To the same, on the Particulars of his
Death. 1754. 176 LETTER LXXIX. To the same, on hearing that his Letters to that
Gentleman were destroyed. 1754 179 LETTER LXXX. To Mr. Jago, on his Amusements
at The Leasowes. 1754. 181 LETTER LXXXI. To C -- W --, Esquire. 1754. 186 LETTER
LXXXII. To Mr. Jago, on their Contribution to Dodsley's Miscellanies. 1755. 187
LETTER LXXXIII. To the same, on the same Subject. 1755. 191 LETTER LXXXIV. To
the same. 1755. 193 LETTER LXXXV. To the same. 1756. 195 LETTER LXXXVI. To Mr.
Graves, with some Account of Politics and Poetry. 1755. 197 LETTER LXXXVII. To
the same, with a Recommendation of Mr. Dodsley to his Acquaintance. 1756. 200
LETTER LXXXVIII. To the same, on Mr. Dodsley and his Works. 1757. 201 LETTER
LXXXIX. To the same. 1757. 204 LETTER XC. To the same. 1757. 206 LETTER XCI. To
the same. 1758. 208 LETTER XCII. To the same. 1758. 212 LETTER XCIII. To the
same, containing an account of his Excursions and Amusements 1758. 213 LETTER
XCIV. To the same, in Expectation of a Visit. 1758. 217 LETTER XCV. To Mr.
Jago. 1759. 218 LETTER XCVI. To Mr. Graves, on their several Situations and
Compositions. 1759. 221 LETTER XCVII. To the same, on Fables, Mottoes, Urns,
Inscriptions, etc. 1759. 223 LETTER XCVIII. To the same. 1759. 227 LETTER XCIX.
To the same, on his Want of Leisure. 1759. 231 LETTER C. To the same, with an
Account of a Design for his own Picture, 1760. 234 LETTER CI. To the same, on
Fable, and other Articles of Taste and Literature. 1760. 236 LETTER CII. To the
same, on his neglecting his Correspondence. 1760. 241 LETTER CIII. To the same,
on Dodsley's Fables, and other literary Articles. 1761. 243 LETTER CIV. To the
same, with some political Anecdotes. 1761. 246 LETTER CV. To the same, on the
intended Publication of his Works 1761, 248 LETTER CVI. To the same, suggesting
to him a Subject for Poetry, 1762. 253 LETTER CVII. To the same 1762. 257
LETTER CVIII. to Mr. Jago. 1762. 263 LETTER CIX. To Sherrington Davenport, Esquire.
1763. 264 LETTER CX. To Mr. Jago. 1763. 268 LETTER CXI. To the same. 1763. 269
MR. SHENSTONE's LETTERS.
I. To Mr. JAGO, with a Song, and the Author's Sentiments on Musical
Composition.
1739. Dear Sir,
AS my head is considerably more confused than usual, by reason of a bad cold,
I shall aim no higher in this letter than at bare recitative, reserving all my
airs for a season when my mind is more in tune. Such, I hope, will be the time
which you set apart to attend the chief musician, at Birmingham. I thoroughly
design to lend an ear to his performance, on condition he will not refuse one
to a proposal I intend to make, of having, one day or other, a merry strain at
the Leasows. But if you have any penchant to see the face of your humble
servant at Birmingham, your most effectual way will be to inform him when these
solemn nuptials betwixt Tweedle-dum and Tweedle-dee are to be consummated. I
will, certes, not be absent at the throwing of the stocking, any more than
Parson Evans in Shakespeare would be "absence at the grace." I have sent a
song, not that I am sure I have not sent it before; but that, if you can see
any joke that it contains, the forementioned gentleman may be asked to
translate it into music. When I use this expression, you will, peradventure,
look upon it as my opinion, that in musical compositions, sound ought as much
to answer sense as one language does another, insomuch, that such and such
thoughts ought to bring into our heads such and such sounds, and vice versa.
But in case there is no sense, and no thought, the more languages a sentence is
translated into, the more it is exposed. And in case it be the misfortune of my
little piece to have neither, I beg that Mr. Marriett may not inform any body
what it signifies in music. As a farther proof of the confused state of my
intellects, you see, almost at the end of my letter, my thanks for the packet,
etc. which ought to have been placed in the very front of it, in order to
express, in some degree, the sense I have of your favors. I long to see you;
and am, dear Sir,

Your most obedient and faithful servant, W. SHENSTONE.

SONG.
WHEN bright Ophelia treads the green
In all the pride of dress and mien;
Averse to freedom, mirth, and play,
The lofty rival of the day;
Methinks to my enchanted eye,
The lilies droop, the roses die.
But when, disdaining art, the fair
Assumes a soft, engaging air:
Mild as the opening morn of May,
And as the feathered warblers gay:
The scene improves wherever she goes,
More sweetly smile the pink and rose.
O lovely maid! propitious hear,
Nor think thy Damon insincere.
Pity my wild delusive flame:
For though the flowers are still the same,
To me they languish, or improve,
And plainly tell me that I love.
II. To the same, in the Manner of PAMELA.
1739.
WELL! and so I sat me down in my room, and was reading Pamela -- one might
furnish this book with several pretty decorations, thought I to myself; and
then I began to design cuts for it, in particular places. For instance, one,
where Pamela is forced to fall upon her knees in the arbor: a second, where she
is in bed, and Mrs. Jewkes holds one hand, and Mr. B. the other: a third, where
Pamela sits sewing in the summer house, etc. So I just sketched them out, and
sent my little hints, such as they were, to Mr. R -- n. As soon as I had sealed
my letter, in comes Mrs. Arnold His housekeeper, of whom very respectful
mention is made in the course of this correspondence.
-- "Well, Mrs. Arnold," says I, "this Mr. Jago never comes -- what can one do?
I Am as dull as a beetle for want of company." "Sir," says she, "the hen" --
"What makes you out of breath," says I, "Mrs. Arnold, what is the matter?" --
"Why, Sir," says she, "the hen I set last sabbath-day-was-three-weeks has just
hatched, and has brought out all her eggs to good." -- "That Is brave indeed,"
says I. "Ay, that it is," says she, "so be and't please G -- d an how that they
liven, there'll be a glorious parcel of 'em. Shall I bring 'em up for you to
see?" says she. "No, thank ye, Mrs. Arnold," says I; "but aren't ye in some
apprehensions from the kite, Mrs. Arnold?" -- "No, Sir," says she; "I hope
there is no danger; I takes pretty good care of 'em." "I don't question your
care," says I; "for you're seldom without a duck or a chicken about you." --
"Poor pretty creters," says she; "look here, Master, this has gotten a speck of
black upon her tail." -- "Ay, I thought you wern't without one about you," says
I: "I don't think," says I, "Mrs. Arnold, but your soul was designed for a hen
originally." "Why, and if I had been a hen," says she, "I believe I should have
done as much for my chickens as yonder great black-and-white hen does, though I
say it that should not say it," says she. "Ay, that you would," thought I. "Well,
but now when Jago comes, have you got ever a chicken that is fit to kill? "No."
says she, "I doubt there is ne'er-a-one." "Well," says I, "Mrs. Arnold, you and
your chicken may go down; I am going to write a letter." So I sat down, and
wrote thus far: scrattle, scrattle, goes the pen -- why how now? says I --
what^s the matter with the pen? So I thought I would make an end of my letter,
because my pen went scratle, scrattle. Well, I warrant I shall have little
plea, sure when Mr. Jago comes; for I never fixed my heart upon any thing in my
life, but some misfortune happened to balance my pleasure. -- After all,
thought I, it must be some very ill accident that outweighs the pleasure I
shall take in seeing him.

W. SHENSTONE.
Leasows, July 22.
III. To a Friend, too ceremoniously declining to purchase a Horse for him.
1739. SIR,
I CANNOT avoid imagining the first part of your letter was mere raillery. I am
sure it gave me a good deal of pleasure (for I can bear very well to hear my
foibles exposed, though not my faults) and on that account must needs make
grateful mention of it. I acknowledge the oddness of the letter which
occasioned it, and could not expect that such an ill-formed application could
have produced an answer so very oratorical. In the first place, you lay open
the subject, or indeed, what you call the offices in which I am pleased to
employ you. In the next, you allege your own inability to enter upon matters
of such great concernment. That this is rhetorical, nay, pure rhetoric, I
gather from the exordiums of all the declamations that I ever heard in my life.
It Is, moreover, not uncommon with declaimers to give some reasons why they
should not absolutely decline the subject, though they are sensible of their
insufficiency (otherwise they might be expected to sit down, and hold their
tongues.) And this is what you have done, by saying that you are unwilling to
dissent from the world in regard to the subjects you are engaged in. That you,
therefore, chose to steer a middle course, by that means avoiding the
imputation of presumption on the one hand, and indifference on the other. When
this is done, you enter gravely upon the subject, and, to give it a greater
perspicuity, divide it into two parts. The first part happens to be "concerning
the purchase of an horse." On this occasion, you inform me, that I am in a good
country for horses; and, secondly, that I have a number of acquaintance round
about me, who are very well skilled in the nature of them. Now each of these
informations seems, at first sight, to mean no more than what I have better
opportunities of knowing than the person who informs me, and, on this account,
to err in point of superfluity. But, upon second thoughts, they have this force
(to speak like a grammarian) namely, that I am entirely negligent of my own
affairs; and, secondly, that I care not whom I give trouble to, if I can but
avoid it myself; so that the sentences have really a beauty, when one searches
beneath their superficies. After you have said this and more, which includes
all that can be said upon the subject, you descend to the second division, in
relation to which I am too grateful to be otherwise than seri^us in my
acknowledgments.

I had not expatiated thus far but to show that I am not insensible of a sneer;
nor should I expatiate any farther, but to prove, that I am equally sensible of
a favor.

I desire you would believe, that I absolutely assent to your critique. That
some of your sentiments were my own before I communicated the verses; and
others, as soon as you had favored me with the discovery of them. That I
would, per praesentes, return my thanks for them; which you might justly have
claimed, whether I had approved them or not. One exception to this approbation
my modesty bids me mention, on account of your too great partiality in my
favor. My gratitude you are entitled to, without exception or limitation.

It will, perhaps, gratify your curiosity to know, that Mr. G. has a copy of
verses in the last magazine, entitled, "The little Cur." There are several
strokes that are picturesque and humorous; I believe it was done in haste. The
motto is exquisite, and much more properly applied by Mr. G. than the Emperor
Adrian, in my opinion, notwithstanding all that Pope says. Tell me your
judgment of Mr. L -- n's in the same paper. The epigram "To one who refused to
walk in the Park, etc." is a good one.

I have waved sending the verses to Mr. Somervile at present, because I hope to
see you soon either at the Leasows or at Birmingham. I cannot tell whether I
shall have time to enclose in this letter my ballad. If I do, consider it only
as some words that I choose to make use of to some notes of which I am more than
ordinarily fond The tune, "Come and listen to my ditty, etc." The words sounded
upon a true history of Queen Elizabeth, who, looking from a castle, wherein she
was a prisoner, and seeing a country milk-maid singing, expressed great envy at
the girl's condition, and dissatisfaction with regard to her own.
. It is as much designed for my own singing (in private I mean) as ever was a
bottle of cherry-brandy for an old woman's drinking. Now I think of it, I
really believe that I every day approach nearer and nearer to the capacity, the
way, the insignificancy, of an old woman. Mrs. Arnold has certainly, by her
charms, her incantations, and her conversations together, contributed a good
deal to this transformation. Pray come over if you can, and try to reinstate me
in my right mind, in proportion to the soundness of which I shall be more and
more

Your friend and servant, W. S.

IV. To the same, from Town.
1739. Dear Sir,
I RETURN you my thanks, most heartily, for the poetical resentment which you
have shown against my censurers, the Riddle-masters. I have sent Mr.
Somervile's verses and yours to Cave; though I am ashamed to own I neglected it
so long, that, I fear, he will have no room for them this month. If you can
extirpate false wit in a manner, you will do no small service to the true: you
do no small honor to it, whether you extirpate the other or not.

You have heard of the motion; have heard, probably, all that I can tell you of
it. That it was ill-concerted; that it has done the opposition great
disservice; that the King is now confirmed in the opinion of Sir Robert's
honesty; that the younger Mr. Pitt's speech was the most admired on the
opposite side, and Sir R -- t's on the court side; that they did not leave the
House till five in the morning; that Sir R -- t and P -- y are so violent, that
the Sp -- r is continually calling them to order; finally, that the affair has
occasioned this print, which I address to your curiosity merely, though the
lines upon the Bishop are humourous enough. -- Now I mention curiosity; do you
take notice of the many quaint contrivances made use of to catch people's
n^tural inquisitiveness in the pamphlets, viz. "Are these things so?" -- "Yes,
they are." -- "What then!" -- "The devil of a story." -- "Hoy, boys." -- "Up go
we." -- And a thousand others. What do you think must be my expense, who love
to pry into every thing of this kind? Why, truly, one shilling. My company goes
to George's Coffee-house, where, for that small subscription, I read all
pamphlets under a three-shilling dimensions; and, indeed, any larger ones would
not be fit for coffee-house perusal. -- Lord Dudley lent me two sermons, given
him at the House of Lords, which I read last night. In the first, there are a
great many deep animadversions delivered in a style that is tolerable; in the
other, there is as great a want of common English as there is plenty of common
observations. Have you seen the sermons on the Martyrdom and on the Fast Day?
If you read either, send for the first. You Will find me degenerate from a gentle
bard into a snarling critic, if my poem does not please (you will say I am no
very candid one at present:) but let its fate be what it will, I shall lay no
small stress upon the opinion of some that have approved it. As it is at
present in keeping, it discovers no uncommon impudence, and runs no very great
risque; but who can answer for it, when it has the gracelessness to come upon
the town? -- Ora pro nobis, must soon be my motto. It virtues and faults will
then be incapable of addition or diminution, and the pious assistance of
friends must -- but I am no Roman Catholic. -- The intrinsic merit of a book
when it is printed, as well as the past life and conversation of a man that is
departed, must damn, or give it immortality -- I mean, to a certain degree. --
I scrible what comes uppermost, and desire you would do the same.

Yours, W. S.

V. To a Friend, from London, describing his Temper, and Manner of Living there.
From Mr. Wintle's, Perfumer, near Temple Bar, etc. 6th Feb. 1740. Dear Sir,
I AM now with regard to the town pretty much in the same state in which I
expect to be always with regard to the world; sometimes exclaiming and railing
against it; sometimes giving it a good word, and even admiring it. A sun-shiny
day, a tavern-supper after a play well acted, and now and then an invigorating
breath of air in the Mall, never fail of producing a cheerful effect. I don't
know whether I gave you any account of Quin's acting Falstaff in my former
letter: I really imagined that I saw you littering on one side me, shaking your
sides, and sometimes scarce containing yourself. You Will pardon the attitude in
which I placed you, since at was what seemed natural at that circumstance of
time. Comus I have once been at, for the sake of the songs, though I detest it
in any light: but as a dramatic piece the taking of it seems a prodigy; yet
indeed such-a-one, as was pretty tolerably accounted for by a gentleman who
sat by me in the boxes. This learned sage, being asked how he liked the play,
made answer, "He could not tell -- pretty well, he thought -- or indeed as well
as any other play -- he always took it, that people only came there to see and
to be seen -- for as for what was said, he owned, he never understood any thing
of the matter." I told him, I thought a great many of its admirers were in his
case, if they would but own it.

On the other hand, it is amazing to consider to what an universality of
learning people make pretensions here. There Is not a drawer, a chair or hackney
coachman, but is politician, poet, and judge of polite literature.
Chimney-sweepers damn the Convention, and black-shoe-boys cry up the genius of
Shakespeare. "The Danger of writing Verse" is a very good thing; if you have
not read it, I would recommend it to you as poetical. But now I talk of
learning, I must not omit an interview which I accidentally had the other night
in company with Lord D -- and one Mr. C --. We were taken to sup at a private
house, where I found a person whom I had never seen before. The man behaved
exceeding modestly and well; till, growing a little merry over a bottle (and
being a little countenanced by the subject we were upon) he pulls out of his
pocket about half a dozen ballads, and distributes them amongst the company. I
(not finding at first they were of his own composition) read one over, and,
finding it a dull piece of stuff, contented myself with observing, that it was
exceedingly well printed. But to see the man's face on this occasion would make
you pity the circumstance of an author as long as you live. His jollity ceased
(as a flame would do, should you pour water upon it;) and, I believe, for about
five minutes, he spoke not a syllable. At length, recovering himself, he began
to talk about his country-seat, about Houghton Hall, and soon after desired a
health, imagining (as I found afterward) that Lord D -- would have given Sir
Robert's. But he did not, naming Sir T -- L --: mine, which followed, was that
of Mr. L --. Now, who do you think this should be, but honest Ralph Freeman (at
least the writer of the paper so subscribed) your father's old friend and
intimate, Sir Robert's right hand, a person that lives elegantly, drives six of
the best horses in town, and plays on St. John's organ: (you know Mr. L -- is
not only Sir Robert's greatest enemy, but the Gazetteer's proper antagonist.)
We were invited to see him very civilly, and indeed the man behaved with the
utmost good humor, without arrogance, or any attempts at wit, which, probably,
would not have been very successful. Ask your father what he would say to me,
if I should join in the cause with his old friend, and take a good annuity
under Sir Robert, which, I believe, I might have; and little encouragement, God
knows, have I met with on the other side of the question. I say, I believe I
might have, because I know a certain person gives pensions of three pound a
week to porters and the most illiterate, stupid fellows you can imagine, to
talk in his behalf at alehouses; where they fit so long a time, and are as
regularly relieved as one centry relieves another. At least tell him that I
expect in his answer to my letter (which I shall not allow him to assign to
you) he write something to confirm me in my integrity, and to make me prefer
him, and you, and honesty, to lace, brocade, and the smiles of the ladies, Et
Veneri, and cunis, and plumis Sardanapali. But I hope to keep my Hercules in
view, whether in print or manuscript; and though I am as fond of pleasure as
most people, yet I shall observe the rule, Positam sic tangere noli.

I desire I may hear from you next post: I have a line or two, which I intend
for the sons of utter darkness (as you call them) next magazine: I would send
them to you, for your advice, but cannot readily find them. I like every thing
in Mr. Somervile's, but the running of the last line. I think to insert them.
Should be glad to have a line or two of yours, that one may make a bold attack.
I look on it as fun, without the least emotion, I assure you.

I am, dear Sir, Your faithful, scribbling slave, W. SHENSTONE.

VI. To the same at Bath, on his publishing his Poem of the Judgment of
HERCULES.
From Mr. Wintle's, April 30, 1740. My good Friend!
I HEARTILY thank you for the service your letter did me. And a considerable
service, no doubt, it is, to raise the spirits of a person so habitually
dispirited as I have been for some time. For this, and all former favors, as
the sullen fellow says in Shakespeare, "I thank you; I am not of many words,
but I thank you."

I beg you would cease to apologize for your letters: in the first place, it
will lay me under a necessity of doing so; and, in the next place, you may be
assured, that no friendly letter of yours will ever be otherwise than
infinitely agreeable to me.

I sent a letter to Mr. Marriett at Bath, to be left with you at your former
place of residence; you will be so kind as to give it to him.

If I wish for a large fortune, it is rather for the sake of my friends than
myself: or, to compromise the matter with those moralists who argue for the
universality of self-interest, it is to gratify myself in the company, and in
the gratifications, of my friends.

Dr. Ratcliff has sent me a letter, which gives me much satisfaction in respect
of my poem; notwithstanding, he cannot forbear adding, that he expects to hear,
since my pen has so well adorned the fable, that my conduct will, with equal
propriety and elegance, illustrate the moral. However, the simple approbation
of a sincere man affects one more, than Pliny's panegyric could do, from a more
courtly one.

There are several errors of the press, which neither sagacity nor vigilance
itself, I now see, can prevent, and which I beg you to correct with your pen,
in a copy which I must get you to present to C -- L --, together with the
enclosed letter. Please to be at the expense of having it stitched in purple
paper, and gilt at the edges; and I will repay you.

I was loitering yesterday in the coffee-room, when two persons came in,
well-dressed, and called for my poem; read a page or two, and commended the
four lines upon Mr. L -- extremely; ("Loved by that prince, etc.") repeated
them forty times, and, in the end, got them by heart, mentioned them to a third
person, who said he knew of no virtue that the prince was fired with, and then
endeavored to mimic the prince's way of talking; but, says he, I Will show the
four best lines in the poem, and then proceeded to "'It Was youth's perplexing
stage, etc." which are flat enough, God knows -- but to my first heroes; one of
them reads, "When great Alcides to a grove retired." Ay, ay, you know Mr. L --
did retire, he was in the secession; read on; you will find he mentions Delia
anon. Don't you remember Mr. L -- wrote a song upon Delia? but proceed --
you will find he is going to give a description of two ladies, of different
characters, that were in love with Mr. L --. One was (here he named two names,
which I have forgot.) Upon my word, it is fine: I believe it is Pope's; -- but
how comes Pope to praise himself there? ("Loved by that bard, etc.") No doubt,
however, it was written by Mr. Pope, or Mr D --.

My critics proceeded to the reading of the last simile immediately, without
the lines preceding it, and, agreeing that it was a very good thing, called out
for "The Economy of Love." So you see, "Laudant illa, sed ista legunt," is the
case. A person cannot be supposed vain from the approbation of such critics, or
else I would not have inserted such a commendatory paragraph. I never enquire
how my poem takes, and am afraid to do so. -- However, I find some do allow it
to be Mallet's. -- I am impatient till I hear from you: I shall be here till
this day fortnight; afterward at the Leasows -- I must add this, "Ne, studio
nostri, pecces;" but at the same time also -- O defend,
Against your judgment, your most faithful friend.


W. S.
These opposite petitions delineate my state of mind: it is well for me that I
have you at Bath.



VII. To Mr. JAGO, on the Death of his Father.
Leasows, Aug. 28, 1740. Dear Mr. Jago,
I FIND some difficulty in writing to you on this melancholy occasion. No one
can be more unfit to attempt to lessen your grief than myself, because no one
has a deeper sense of the cause of your affliction. Though I would by no means
be numbered by you amongst the common herd of your acquaintance, that tell you
they are sorry, yet it were impertinent in me to mention a mere friend's
concern to a person interested by so many more tender regards. Beside, I should
be glad to alleviate your sorrow, and such fort of condolence tends but little
to promote that end. I do not choose to flatter you; neither could I, more
especially at this time; but though I could perhaps find enough to say to
persons of less sense than you, I know of nothing but what your own reason must
have suggested. Concern indeed may have suspended the power of that faculty;
and upon that pretense I have a few things that I would suggest to you. After
all, it is time alone, that can and will cure all afflictions, but such as are
the consequence of vice; and yours, I am sure, proceeds from a contrary
principle.

I heard accidentally of this sorrowful event, and accompanied you to London
with the umost concern. I wished it was in my power to mitigate your griefs by
sharing them, as I have often found it in yours to augment my pleasures by so
doing.

All that I can recommend to you is, not to confine your eye to any single
event in life, but to take in your whole circumstances before you repine.

When you reflect that you have lost one of the best of men in a father, you
ought to comfort yourself that you had such a father; to whom I cannot forbear
applying these lines from Milton: -- Since to part!
Go, heavenly guest, ethereal messenger!
Sent by whose sovereign goodness we adore!
Gentle to me and affable has been
Thy condescension, and shall be honored ever
With grateful'st memory --
End of Book VIII, PAR. LOST.

I would have you, by all means, come over hither as soon as you can. -- I will
endeavor to render the time you spend here as satisfactory as it is in my
power; and I hope you will ever look upon me as your hearty friend, through all
the vissitudes of life.

Pray give my humble service to Mrs. Jago and your brother.

I am, with the utmost affection, Yours sincerely, W. SHENSTONE.

VIII. To Mr. REYNOLDS.
Leasows, 1740. Dear Sir,
WONDERFUL were the dangers and difficulties through which I went, the night I
left you at Barels; which I looked upon as ordained by fate for the temporal
punishment of obstinacy. It was very kind, and in character for you to
endeavor to deter me from the ways of darkness; but having a sort of penchant
for needless difficulties, I have an undoubted right to indulge myself in them,
so long as I do not insist upon any one's pity. It is true, these ought not to
exceed a certain degree; they should be lenia tormenta; and I must own the
labors I underwent that night, did not come within the bounds which my
imagination had prescribed. I cannot forbear mentioning one imminent danger. --
I rode along a considerable piece of water covered so close with trees, that it
was as probable I might have pursued the channel, which was dangerous, as my
way out of it. Or, to put my case in a more poetical light, having by night
intruded upon an amor betwixt a Wood-nymph and a River-god, I owed my escape
to Fortune, who conveyed me from the vengeance which they might have taken. I
put up finally at a little alehouse about ten o'clock, and lay all night awake,
counting the cords which supported me, which I could more safely swear to than
to either bed or blanket. For farther particulars, see my epistle to the Pastor
Fido of Lapworth. -- Mr. Graves says, he should be glad to show you any
civilities in his power, upon his own acquaintance; and will serve you as far
as his vote goes, upon my recommendation; but is afraid, without the
concurrence of some more considerable friends, your chance will be but small
this year, etc. If the former part of this news gives you any pleasure, I
assure you it gives me no less to communicate it; and this pleasure proceeds
from a principle which would induce me to serve you myself, if it should ever
be in my power. -- I saw Mr. Lyttleton last week: he is a candidate for the
county of Worcester, together with Lord Deerhurst; I hope Mr. Somervile will do
him the honor to appear as his friend, which he must at least think second to
that of succeeding.

I hear you are commenced chaplain since I saw you. I wish you joy of it. The
chaplain's title is infinitely more agreeable than his office; and I hope the
scarf, which is expressive of it, will be no diminutive thing, no
fourpenny-halfpenny piece of ribboning; but that it will High over the neck its
rustling folds display,
Disdain all usual bounds, extend its sway,
Usurp the head, and push the wig away.


I hope it will prove ominous, that my first letter is a congratulatory one;
and if I were to have opportunities of sending all such, it would entirely
quadrate with the sincere wishes of

Your faithful, humble servant, W. SHENSTONE.
I beg my compliments to Mr. Somervile, Mrs. Knight, and your family.

Leasows, Aug. 1740.


IX. To the same.
From Mr. Wintle's, Perfumer, at the King's Arms, by Temple Bar, Fleet Street,
1740. Sir,
I AM heartily obliged to Mr. Somervile, that he will make use of any means to
serve me; more especially that he will take the trouble of consulting which may
be most effectual to that end; and I desire you would represent these
sentiments to him in the most expressive manner.

I have, since I arrived here (which was last Saturday night) heard Low sing,
and seen Cibber act. The laureat spoke an epilogue made upon, and, I suppose,
by himself, in which he does not only make a bare confession, but an
ostentation of all his follies: Of such, says he, whoever demands a bill of fare
May look into my life -- he will find 'em there;
or some such lines, I cannot accurately recollect them. I do not wonder he
pleased extremely; but to a considering man there is something strangely
disagreeable, to hear a scandalous life recommended by one of his age, and as
much satisfaction shown in the review of it, as if it had been a perfect galaxy
of virtues. An Athenian audience would have shown their different sentiments on
this occasion. But I am acting the part of Jeremy Collier, and indeed in some
degree of an Hypocrite, for I confess I was highly pleased with him myself. I
have nothing to add, but a fine close, if I had it; as I have not, you must be
content with the vulgar one, that I am

Yours sincerely, W. SHENSTONE.

X. To the same.
Dear Sir,
I THANK you for the favor of your last letter, particularly your readiness in
transmitting to me any thing of Mr. Somervile's. It so fell out, that Mr.
Outing delivered to me the verses, and I had the pleasure of reading them about
a moment before he gave me your epistle.

The town expected something of importance, namely, a motion for a committee of
enquiry into late measures, would be moved for to day. If any thing of this
nature has been carried on, I will add an account of it before I close my
letter. In the mean time, it is, I believe, very credible, that Lord Orford has
a continued influence over the King; and that the Duke of Argyle is
sufficiently disgusted, to have talked of the resignation of his posts again.

An odd story enough the following, and I believe true! Somebody that had just
learnt that Hor W 's gentleman's name was Jackson, writes a letter to Mr
Floyer, keeper of the Tower, intimating his master's desire to speak with him.
Floyer dresses the next morning, and waits upon H -- e, comes into his room, --
"Sir, says Horace, I really don't know you. -- " "Sir, my name is Floyer. -- "
"Ay, by G -- d, that may be; I don't know you for all that -- " "Sir, says he,
I am keeper of the Tower -- " "G -- d damn your blood, says H -- e, produce
your warrant -- damn you, produce your warrant; or, by G -- d, I Will kick ye
down stairs -- "

Frighted at these threats, the gentleman retired; and in his way home had
leisure to consider the joke that was put upon him, and more particularly
turned upon the person to whom he was sent.

If you direct a line to Mr. Shuckburgh's, bookseller, in Fleet Street, it will
arrive agreeable to

Your humble servant, W. SHENSTONE.
March, Tuesday Night. MY compliments to your patron.



XI. To the same.
1740. SIR,
YOUR last letter gave me a good deal of uneasiness, in rgard to Mr.
Somervile's indisposition. I hope, if he is better, you will omit no
opportunity of gratifying me with the news of it. I shall be glad to employ you
and Mr. Jago in my little rivulet before winter comes, when one must bid adieu
to rural beauties. Those charming scenes, which the poets, in order to render
them more complete, have furnished with ladies, must be stripped of all their
ornaments. Those incomparable nymphs, the Dryads and the Nereids, which have
been my constant companions this short summer, will vanish to more pleasing
climes; and I must be left to seek my assistance in real beauties, instead of
imaginary ones. In short, I am thinking to live part of this winter in
Worcester, or some other town. I was at a concert there, a very full one,
lately. I observed Dr. Mackenzie talking to Mr. Lyttleton; and I hope, on that
account, he is in his interest; otherwise Mr. Somervile would do Mr. Lyttleton
great service by engaging him. -- Mr. Lyttleton took occasion to mention to me,
the obligation he lay under to Mr. Somervile for his letter, as well as his
other designs in his favor -- that he had long received great pleasure from
that gentleman's pen, and wished for the honor of his acquaintance. I told
him, I believed the satisfaction would be mutual, or to that purpose. He added,
that the Chase was an extremely beautiful poem, the best by far ever written on
the subject. But now the fiddles squeaked, the harpsichord jingled, and the
performers began to feel the divine enthusiasm. The god of music invaded them
as he did the Sibyll of old: Deus, ecce Deus! cui talia fanti
Ante fores, subito non vultus, non color unus,
Non comptae mansere comae; sed pectus anhelum,
Et rabie fera corda tument, majorque videri,
Nec mortale sonans.


I am, Sir, with all due compliments to Mr. Somervile,

Yours sincerely, W. SHENSTONE.

XII. To Mr. JAGO, from London, with Observations on the Stage, etc.
Jan. 21, 1741. Sir,
YOU see I am extremely expeditious in answering your letter; the reason of
which is a very powerful one, namely, the information which I received last
night, that it would be agreeable to you I should do so. Please, therefore, to
set aside the sum of eighteen pence, or thereabouts, for letters which you will
receive whilst I am in London; and, to make it seem the less profusely
squandered, consider it amongst any other casual expenses which you carelessly
submit to, merely to gratify your curiosity.

I went the other night, with the greatest expectations, to see "The Merry
Wives of Windsor" performed at Covent Garden. It is impossible to express how
much every thing fell below my ideas. But I have considered since; and I find,
that my expectations were really more unjust than their manner of acting.
Persons, in order to act well, should have something of the author's fire, as
well as a polite education. And what makes this the clearer to me is, that you
hear ten plays well read by gentlemen in company, to one that you find well
performed upon the stage. -- Nothing can be more ignorant or affected than the
scornful airs which some people give themselves at a country play; because,
forsooth, they have seen plays in town. The truth is, the chief advantage of
plays in town lies entirely in the scenery. You seldom observe a set of
strollers without one or two actors who are quite equal to their parts; and I
really know of no good one, at either of the two Theaters Royal, except Cibber,
who rarely acts, and Mrs. Olive, I will add one more, in compliance with my own
taste merely, and that is Mr. Neal, a fellow who, by playing the fool, has
gained my particular esteem.

After the play, we had an entertainment; -- falsely so called! It was that of
Orpheus and Eurydice, the most un-musical thing I ever heard, and which lasted,
I believe, three hours, with some intermixtures of Harlequin; both so dull, and
yet heard with patience, that I was amazed, astonished, confounded; but really
a man of sense ought not to be so; because they were not calculated for him.

I want you here extremely; -- pray come up for a week. I suppose you will not,
so I will not argue superfluously. However, write soon; and believe that your
letters are the most agreeable things in the world to, Sir,

Yours most faithfully, W. S.

XIII. To the same.
1741. Dear Sir,
AS I have no sort of library in town, I find several minutes upon my hands,
for which, if I employ them in scribbling to my friends, they are but slenderly
obliged to me. I hope no friend of mine will ever be induced, by my example, to
do any thing but avoid it; I believe no one breathing can say, with more truth,
"Video meliora, etc." It is not from a spirit of jealousy that I would advise
my acquaintance to seek happiness in the regular path of a fixed life. But,
though I very highly approve of it, and envy it, my particular turn of mind
would be as little satisfied with it, as it is like to be a different one. Yet,
however I complain, I must own, I have a good deal reconciled myself to this
mixture of gratification and disappointment, which must be my lot, till the
last totally prevails.

YET, after all, to tell you the truth, I am not pleased with being advised to
retire. I was saying the other day to Mr. Outing, that I had been ambitious
more than I was at present, and that I grew less so every day. Upon this he
chimed in with me, and approved my despondency; saying, "that he also had been
ambitious, but found it would not do." Do you think I liked him much for this?
-- no -- I wheeled about and said, "I did not think with him; for I should
always find myself whetted by disappointments, and more violent in proportion
to the intricacy of the game." I spent a night with him and Mr. Meredith, and
with him and Mr. Dean: in the latter party he had laid his hand upon his sword
six times, and threatened to put a dozen men to death, one of which was
Broughton the prize-fighter. -- Mr. Whistler's company seldom relieves me on an
evening; and I go to plays but seldom, because I intend no more to give
countenance to the pit. -- I have got a belt!!! which distinguishes me as much
as a garter -- it captivates the eyes of all beholders, and binds their
understanding in golden bandage. -- I heard a pedant punning upon the word
(...); and a wag whispering that I was related to Beltishazzar. In short, I may
say, from the Dragon of Wantley, No girdle, nor belt, ever excelled it;
It frightens the men in a minute;
No maiden yet ever beheld it,
But wished herself tied to me in it.


THE Dunciad is, doubtless, Mr. Pope's dotage, (...); slat in the whole, and
including, with severable tolerable lines, a number of weak, obscure, and even
punning ones. What is now read by the whole world, and the whole world's wife,
is, Mr. Hervey's Letter to Sir T. Hanmer. I own my taste is gratified in it, as
well as that unluckiness, natural to every one; though people say (I think
idly) he is mad. For this long letter I shall expect two, soon after you have
received it. Adieu!

DID you see a poem, called "Woman in Miniature," written with spirit, but
incorrect? The people that were carrying Lord Orford in effigy, to behead him
on Tower Hill, came into the box where he was, accidentally, at George's, to
beg money of him, amongst others.

XIV. To Mr. --, on his taking Orders in the Church.
Leasows, June 1, 1741. Dear Sir,
I WRITE to you out of the abundant inclination I have to hear from you,
imagining that, as you gave me a direction, you might possibly expect to
receive a previous letter from me. I want to be informed of the impressions you
receive from your new circumstances. The chief aversion which some people have
to orders is, what I fancy you will remove in such as you converse with. I take
it to be owing partly to dress, and partly to the avowed profession of
religion. A young clergyman, that has distinguished his genius by a composition
or two of a polite nature, and is capable of dressing himself, and his
religion, in a different manner from the generality of his profession, that is,
without formality, is certainly a genteel character. I speak this not with any
sly design to advise, but to intimate, that I think you very capable of shining
in a dark-colored coat. -- You must consider me yet as a man of the world, and
endeavoring to elicit that pleasure from gaiety, which my reason tells me I
shall never find. -- It is impossible to express how stupid I have been ever
since I came home, insomuch that I cannot write a common letter without six
repetitions. This is the third time I have begun yours, and you see what stuff
it is made up of. I must even hasten to matter of fact, which is the
comfortable resource of dull people, -- though, even as to that, I have nothing
to communicate. But I would be glad to know, whether you are under a necessity
of residing on weekdays; and, if not, why I may not expect you a day or two at
the Leasows very soon. -- Did you make any enquiry concerning the number of my
poems sold at Oxford? or did you hear any thing concerning it that concerns me
to hear? -- Will S -- (for that is his true name) is the excess of simplicity
and goodnature. He seems to have all the industry imaginable to divert and
amuse people, without any ambitious ends to serve, or almost any concern
whether he has so much as a laugh allowed to his stories, any farther than as a
laugh is an indication that people are delighted. This, joined with his turn of
thought, renders him quite agreeable. I wish it were in my power to conciliate
acquaintance with half his case. -- Pray do not delay writing to me. Adieu!

W. SHENSTONE.

XV. To Mr. GRAVES, on similar Taste and Manners.
The Leasows, Sept. 13, 1741. Dear Sir,
I WAS very agreeably entertained by your last letter, as indeed I am by every
one of yours. It were affectation to except a paragraph or two on account of
partiality, where, to say the truth, the partiality itself pleases one. -- This
I am very positive of, that to have a friend of your temper and taste will
always give me pleasure, whether I please the world or no; but to please ever
so much, without some such friendship, would, in all probability, signify but
little. I shall, therefore, value any means that tend to confirm my opinion of
your esteem for me, preferably to any that show me I am merely deserving of it.
After all, though a very limited number of friends may be sufficient, an idle
person should have a large acquaintance; and I believe I have the least of any
one that ever rambled about so much as I have done. I do not know how it is,
but I absolutely despair of ever being introduced into the world. It may be
objected by some (but you will not object it) that I may be acquainted with a
sufficient number of people that are my equals, if I will. They may be my
equals and superiors, whom they mean, for aught I care; but their conversation
gives me no more pleasure than the canking of a goose, or the quacking of a
duck, in affluent circumstances. Rather less indeed of the two, because the
idea of the sat goose flatters one's appetite; but the human goose is neither
fit to be heard nor eaten. I wish indeed to be shown into good company; but, if
I can at all distinguish the nature of my inclinations, it is more in hopes of
meeting with a refined conversation, than any thing else. I do not at all
insist that my genius is better than that of my vociferous neighbors; if it be
different, it is a sufficient reason why I should seek such companions as suit
it; and whether they are found in high or low life, is little to the purpose.
But you will perhaps discern the operations of vanity in all my endeavors; I
will not disagree with you, provided you will allow amusement an equal share in
them. It is the vanity to be intimate with men of distinguished sense, not of
distinguished fortune. And this is a vanity which you should not disapprove,
because it will bind me a lasting friend to you and your family.

I have been over at Shiffnall, and, in order to make myself agreeable, rode a
hunting with Mr. Pit. I confess I was somewhat diverted; and my horse was so
much an enthusiast, as to be very near running headlong into a deep water. I
believe, if I were to turn sportsman, I should soon break my neck, for fear the
huntsman should despise me.

I will certainly endeavor to see you at Birmingham; but beg you would write
me a long letter in the mean time; and contrive, if you can, to make it look
like a packet, as your last did, for the sight thereof is exceedingly
comfortable.

Though my wishes will not suffer me to believe that your eyes are in the
danger you represent; yet, supposing them to be only very weak, I would
recommend some musical instrument, that is most agreeable to you. I have often
looked upon music as my dernier resort, if I should ever discard the world, and
turn eremite entirely. Consider what other amusement can make an equal
impression in old age.

I have filled my paper not without difficulty, through the barrenness of my
brain, and situation: my heart ever slows with the most warm streams of
gratitude and affection for you. Adieu!

W. SHENSTONE.

XVI. To a Friend, expressing his Dissatisfaction at the Manner of Life in
which he is engaged.
1741. Dear Sir,
I WONDER I have not heard from you lately -- of you indeed I have, from Mr. W
--. If you could come over, probably, I might go back with you for a day or
two; for my horse I think gets rather better, and may, with indulgence, perform
such a journey. I want to advise with you about several matters -- to have your
opinion about a building that I have built, and about a journey which I design
to Bath; and about numberless things, which, as they are numberless, cannot be
comprehended in this paper. I am

Your most affectionate friend, W. SHENSTONE.
Now I am come home from a visit -- every little uneasiness is sufficient to
introduce my whole train of melancholy considerations, and to make me utterly
dissatisfied with the life I now lead, and the life which I foresee I shall
lead. I am angry, and envious, and dejected, and frantic, and disregard all
present things, just as becomes a madman to do. I am infinitely pleased (though
it is a gloomy joy) with the application of Dr. Swift's complaint, "that he is
forced to die in a rage, like a poisoned rat in a hole." My soul is no more
suited to the figure I make, than a cable rope to a cambrick needle: -- I
cannot bear to see the advantages alienated, which I think I could deserve and
relish so much more than those that have them. -- Nothing can give me patience
but the soothing sympathy of a friend, and that will only turn my rage into
simple melancholy. -- I believe soon I shall bear to see nobody. I do hate all
hereabouts already, except one or two. I will have my dinner brought upon my
table in my absence, and the plates fetched away in my absence: and nobody
shall see me: for I can never bear to appear in the same stupid mediocrity for
years together, and gain no ground. As Mr. G -- complained to me (and, I think,
you too, both unjustly,) "I am no character." -- I have in my temper some
rakishness, but it is checked by want of spirits; some solidity, but it is
softened by vanity: some esteem of learning, but it is broke in upon by
laziness, imagination, and want of memory, etc. -- I could reckon up twenty
things throughout my whole circumstances wherein I am thus tantalized. Your
fancy will present them. -- Not that all I say here will signify to you; I am
only under a fit of dissatisfaction, and to grumble does me good -- only excuse
me, that I cure myself at your expense. Adieu!



XVII. To the same.
1741. Dear Sir,
YOU must give me leave to complain of your last letter, three parts of which
is filled with mere apology: I thought we had some time agreed, for our mutual
emolument, to lay aside ceremonies of this species; till I was made
Poet-laureat, and you Bishop of Winchester. -- Why Bishop of Winchester, for
God's sake? Why -- because -- he is prelate of the Garter -- an order, in all
kinds of ceremony so greatly abounding. -- Here am I still, trifling away my
time, my money, and, I think, my health, which I fancy greatly inferior to what
it it would be in the country. Truth is, I do make shift to vary my days a
little here; and, calling to mind the many irksome hours, the stupid identity
of which I have been so often sick in the country, I conclude that I am less
unhappy than I shall find myself at home. -- However, next month I hope to see
the Leasows with an appetite. -- Walks in the park are now delightfully
pleasant: the company stays in the Mall till ten every night. -- Mrs. Olive,
Mrs. Woffington, Barbarini, and Mr. Garrick (happy man!) are gone over to
Ireland, to act there for two months. -- Mr. Outing, the last time I saw him,
told me how Dr. Mackenzie cured him of ever fighting with scrubs, "I was just
going, says he, to kick a fellow down stairs, when the Doctor cries out, 'Mr.
Outing! hear our Scotch proverb before you proceed any farther; -- He that
wrestles with a t -- d, whether he get or lose the victory, is sure to be b --
t.' I had great difficulty (continued he) to contain myself till he had
finished his story, but I found it so pat that it saved the fellow's neck" I
wish I could cure him as easily of these Quixotical narrations -- I know no
soul in town that has any taste, which occasions me the spleen frequently. I
remember W -- and I were observing, that no creatures, though ever so
loathsome, (as toads, serpents, adders, etc.) would be half so hated as
ourselves, if we were to give vent to our spleen, and censure affections so
bluntly as some people do. I would not venture this hint, if I did not believe
you experience the same. For my part, people contradict me in things I have
studied, and am certain of; and I keep silence even from good words ( bons
mots) though it is pain and grief to me. I must give up my knowledge to
pretense, or vent it with diffidence to fools, or there is no peace. These,
these are justifiable motives to wish for some degree of same; that blind
people may not bully a man that has his eyesight into their opinion that green
is red, etc. Deference from fools, is no inviduous ambition; I dare own to you
that I have this; and I will contend that I have no more haughty one. -- This
subject I could expatiate upon with pleasure; but I stop: a tasteless fellow
has spoiled my Mall-walk tonight, and occasioned you some trouble in these
dull observations. -- I am

Yours affectionately, W. SHENSTONE.

XVIII. To Mr. -- from the Leasows.
The Leasows, June 17th, 1741. Dear Sir,
IF a friend of yours who lived in the farthest part of China were to send you
a pinch of snuff wrapped up in a sheet of writing-paper, I conceive the snuff
would improve in value as it traveled, and gratify your curiosity extremely by
the time it reached your fingers ends -- Very true -- you will say: -- why
then, that very consideration was my inducement to write to you at this time;
and that sort of progressional value is what you are to place upon my letter.
For, be assured, I am not ignorant how much this my letter does resemble a
pinch of snuff in point of significancy, and that both the one and the other
are what you may as well do without. -- My letter is as follows.

You must know, in rainy weather, I always soothe my melancholy with the
remembrance of distant friends only: you cannot easily conceive the high value
I place upon their good qualities at such a time: so that at this very instant
I am impatient to see you. Tomorrow, if the sun shines bright, I shall only
wish for your company as for a very great good. If you are unemployed when you
leave Bath, I should think, you might stay some time with me this summer.
Refined sense is what one is apt to value one's self upon; but really, unless
one has a refined soul or two to converse with, it is an inconvenience. I have
ruined my happiness by conversing with you, and a few more friends: as Falstaff
says to Hal, "Company, witty company, has been the ruin of me!" Before I knew
that pleasure, I was as contented as could be in my solitude; and now, the
absence of entertainment is a positive pain to me. London has amused me a while
with diversions; but now they are past, and I have neither any one about me
that has the least delicatesse, or that I can inspire with the ambition of
having any. -- W -- W -- comes in a dirty shirt, and an old coat, without a
stock, to pay me a visit. He pulled out a pair of scissars, and, giving them an
intricate turn over his two thumbs, said, that he could do that, and I could
make a poem; some for one thing, some for another: Hic nigri succos loliginis,
haec est
Aerugo mera.
It was splenetic weather too. -- The man is cursed who writes verses, and lives
in the country. -- If his celestial part inspires him to converse with Juno,
his terestrial one necessitates him to to stoop to his landlady; so that he is
in as disagreeable a situation, as if one person were to pull him upwards by
the head, and another downwards by the tail. -- Do you never find any thing of
this? -- I mean, that your pride and your social qualities torture you with
their different attractions? Indeed one would always give way to the last, but
that few are familiarity-proof, few but whom it teaches to despise one. Albeit
I am conscious of the bad influence of freedom myself; yet, whilst it tends to
discover wit, humor, and sense, it only renders me more and more

Your most obedient friend and servant, W. SHENSTONE.

XIX. To the same, with an invitation to accompany him to Town.
The Leasows, Nov. 25, 1741. Dear Sir,
THE reason why I write to you so suddenly is, that I have a proposal to make
to you. If you could contrive to be in London for about a month from the end of
December, I imagine you would spend it agreeably enough along with me, Mr.
Outing, and Mr. Whistler. According to my calculations, we should be a vely
happy party at a play, coffee-house, or tavern. -- Do not let your supercilious
friends come in upon you with then prudential maxims. -- Consider, you are now
of the proper age for pleasure, and have not above four or five whimsical years
left. You have not struck one bold stroke yet, that I know of. Saddle your
mule, and let us be jogging to the great city. I will be answerable for
amusement. -- Let me have the pleasure of seeing you in the pit, in a laughter
as cordial and singular as your friendship. Come -- let us go forth into the
opera-house; let us hear how the cunuch-folk sing. Turn your eyes upon the
lilies and roses, diamonds and rubies; the Belindas and the Sylvias of gay
life! Think upon Mrs. Olive's inexpressible comicalness; not to mention
Hippesley's joke-abounding physiognomy! Think, I say, now: for the time comes
when you shall say, "I have no pleasure in them." -- I am conscious of much
merit in bringing about the interview betwixt Mr. L -- and Mr. S --; but merit,
as Sir John Falstaff says, is not regarded in these coster-monger days.

Pray now do not write me word that your business will not allow you ten
minutes in a fortnight to write to me; an excuse fit for none but a cobbler, who
has ten children dependent upon a waxen thread. Adieu!

W. S.

XX. To the same, on occasion of printing the SCHOOL-MISTRESS.
1741. Dear Sir,
I TRUST you do not pay double postage for my levity in enclosing these
decorations. If I find you do, I will not send you the thatch'dhouse and the
birch-tree, with the sun setting and gilding the scene. -- I expect a cargo of
franks; and then for the beautiful picture of Lady Gainsborough, and the
deformed portrait of my old school-dame, Sarah Lloyd! whose house is to be seen
as thou travellest toward the native home of thy faithful servant. -- But she
sleeps with her fathers; and is buried with her fathers; and -- Thomas her son
reigns in her stead! -- I have the first sheet to correct upon the table. I
have laid aside the thoughts of same a good deal in this un-promising scheme;
and fix them upon the landscape which is engraving, the red letter which I
purpose, and the fruit piece which you see, being the most seemly ornaments of
the first sixpenny pamphlet that was ever so highly honored. I shall incur the
same reflection with Ogilby, of having nothing good but my decorations.

I have been walking in the Mall tonight. -- The Duke was there, and was
highly delighted with two dogs, and stared at me more enormously than ever Duke
did before. I do not know for what reason; unless for the same which made him
admire the other puppy-dogs, because they were large ones.

I expect that in your neighborhood, and in Warwickshire, there should be
about twenty of my poems sold. I print it myself. I am not yet satisfied about
mottoes. That printed is this, "O, qua sol habitabiles illustrat oras, maxim
principum!" It must be short, on account of the plate. I do not know but I may
adhere to a very insignificant one: En erit ergo
Ille dies, mihi cum liceat tua dicere facta!


I am pleased with Mynde's engravings; and I can speak without affectation,
that Fame is not equally in my thoughts. -- One caution I gave Mr. W --, and it
is what I would give to all my friends with whom I wish my intimacy may
continue so much as I wish it may with you. Though I could bear the disregard
of the town; I could not bear to see my friends alter their opinion, which they
say they have, of what I write, though millions contradict them. It is an
obstinacy which I can boast of, and they that have more sense may surely insist
on the liberty of judging for themselves. If you should faulter, I should say
you did not deserve your capacity to judge for yourself. Write soon -- you
never are at a fault -- "tantummodo incepto opus est, caetera res expediet."
Adieu!

W. S.

XXI. To the same, from Town, on the Death of Mr. Somervile, etc.
1741. My good friend,
OUR old friend Somervile is dead! I did not imagine I could have been so sorry
as I find myself on this occasion. "Sublatum quaerimus." I can now excuse all
his foibles; impute them to age, and to distress of circumstances; the last of
these considerations wrings my very soul to think on. For a man of high spirit,
conscious of having (at least in one production) generally pleased the world,
to be plagued and threatened by wretches that are low in every sense; to be
forced to drink himself into pains of the body in order to get rid of the pains
of the mind, is a misery which I can well conceive, because I may, without
vanity, esteem myself his equal in point of economy, and consequently ought to
have an eye on his misfortunes: (As you kindly hinted to me at twelve o'clock
at the Feathers) I should retrench; -- I will; but you shall not see me: -- I
will not let you know that I took your hint in good part. I will do it at
solitary times, as I may: and yet there will be some difficulty in it; for
whatever the world might esteem in poor Somervile, I really find, upon critical
enquiry, that I loved him for nothing so much as his flocci-nauci-nihili-pili
fication of money.

Mr. A -- was honorably acquitted: Lord A --, who was present, and behaved
very insolently they say, was hissed out of court. They proved his application
to the carpenter's son, to get him to swear against Mr. A --, though the boy
was proved to have said in several companies ( before he had been kept at Lord
A -- 's house) that he was sure the thing was accidental. Finally, it is
believed he will recover the title of A -- ea.

The apprehension of the whores, and the suffocation of four in the
round-house, by the stupidity of the keeper, engrosses the talk of the town.
The said house is rebuilding every day (for the mob on Sunday night demolished
it), and re-demolished every night. The Duke of M -- gh, J -- S -- his brother,
Lord C -- G --, were taken into the round-house, and confined from eleven at
night till eleven next day: I am not positive of the Duke of M -- gh, the
others are certain: and that a large number of people of the first fashion went
from the round-house to De Veil's, to give in informations of their usage. The
justice himself seems greatly scared; the prosecution will be carried on with
violence, so as probably to hang the keeper, and there is an end.

Lord Bath's coachman got drunk and tumbled from his box, and he was forced to
borrow Lord Orford's. Wits say, that it was but gratitude for my Lord Orford's
coachman to drive my Lord Bath, as my Lord Bath himself had driven my Lord
Orford. Thus they.

I have ten million of things to tell you; though they all amount to no more than
that I wish to please you, and that I am

Your sincere friend and humble servant.
I am pleased that I can say I knew Mr. Somervile, which I am to thank you for.



XXII. To Mr. Graves, on Benevolence and Friendship.
The Leasows, Jan, 19, 1741-2. Dear Mr. Graves,
I CANNOT forbear immediately writing to you: the pleasure your last letter
gave me puts it out of my power to restrain the overflowings of my benevolence.
I can easily conceive that, upon some extraordinary instances of friendship, my
heart might be si sort attendri, that I could not bear any restraint upon my
ability to show my gratitude. It is an observation I made upon reading to day's
paper, which contains an account of C. Khevenhuller's success in favor of the
Queen of Hungary. To think what sublime affection must influence that poor
unfortunate Queen, should a faithful and zealous General revenge her upon her
enemies, and restore her ruined affairs!

Had a person shown an esteem and affection for me, joined with any elegance,
or without any elegance, in the expression of it, I should have been in acute
pain till I had given some sign of my willingness to serve him. -- From all
this, I conclude that I have more humanity than some others.

Probably enough I shall never meet with a larger share of happiness than I
feel at present. If not, I am thoroughly convinced, my pain is greatly superior
to my pleasure. That pleasure is not absolutely dependent on the mind, I know
from this, that I have enjoyed happier scenes in the company of some friends,
than I can possibly at present; -- but alas; all the time you and I shall enjoy
together, abstracted from the rest of our lives, and lumped, will not perhaps
amount to a solid year and a half. How small a proportion!

People will say to one that talks thus, "Would you die?" To set the case upon
a right footing, they must take away the hopes of greater happiness in this
life, the fears of greater misery hereafter, together with the bodily pain of
dying, and address me in a disposition betwixt mirth and melancholy; and I
could easily resolve them.

I do not know how I am launched out so far into this complaint: it is,
perhaps, a strain of constitutional whining; the effect of the wind -- did it
come from the winds? to the winds will I deliver it: Tradam protervis in mare
Creticum,
Portare ventis --


I will be as happy as my fortune will permit, and make others so: Pone me
pigris ubi nulla campis
Arbor aestiva recreatur aura.


I will be so. The joke is, that the description which you gave of that country
was, that you had few trees about you; so that I should trick fortune if she
should grant my petition implicitly. But in earnest, I intend to come and stay
a day or two with you next summer.

Mr. Whistler is at Mr. Gosling's, bookseller, at the Mitre and Crown, in
Fleet Street, and enquired much after you in his last letter to me. He writes
to me; but I believe his affection for one weighs less with him, while the town
is in the other scale. Though he is very obliging. I do not know whether I do
right, when I say I believe we three, that is, in solitary circumstances, have
an equal idea of, and affection for, each other. I say, supposing each to be
alone, or in the country, which is nearly the same; for scenes alter minds as
much as the air influences bodies. For instance, when Mr. Whistler is in town,
I suppose we love him better than he does us; and when we are in town, I
suppose the same may be said in regard to him.

The true burlesque of Spenser (whose characteristic is simplicity) seems to
consist in a simple representation of such things as one laughs to see or to
observe one's self, rather than in any monstrous contrast between the thoughts
and words. I cannot help thinking that my added stanzas have more of his manner
than what you saw before, which you are not a judge of, till you have read him.

W. S.

XXIII. To the same, with some Observations on SPENCER.
Leasows, The Day before Christmas. Dear Sir,
THOUGH your last letter seemed to put my correspondence upon an ostentatious
footing, namely, an inclination to be witty, yet I assure you it was not any
punctilious consideration of that kind that has kept me so long silent. Indeed
with some people one would stand upon the nicest punctilios; for though
ceremony be altogether lighter than vanity itself, yet it surely weighs as much
as the acquaintance of the undeserving. But this is trifling, because it can
have no reference to a person for whom I have the greatest affection.

In regard to my Oxford affairs, you did all I could expect. I have wrote since
to Mr. M --, who, either for your sake or mine, will, I dare say, settle them
to my satisfaction.

I wish your journey and headache would have permitted you to have been a
little more particular concerning the seat of the Muses; but I suppose nothing
material distinguished your fortnight.

Mr. Whistler has relapsed at Whitchurch; but purposed, when I last heard from
him, to go to London before this time. I do not entirely understand his
schemes, but should have been sincerely glad of his company with me this
winter; and, he says, he is not fond of London. -- For my part, I designed to
go thither the next month, but the fever (which is chiefly violent in towns)
discourages me.

Some time ago, I read Spenser's Fairy Queen; and, when I had finished, thought
it a proper time to make some additions and corrections in my trifling
imitation of him, the School-mistress. His subject is certainly bad, and his
action inexpressibly confused; but there are some particulars in him that charm
one. Those which afford the greatest scope for a ludicrous imitation are, his
simplicity and obsolete phrase; and yet these are what give one a very singular
pleasure in the perusal. The burlesque which they occasion is of quite a
different kind to that of Philips's Shilling, Cotton's Travestie, Hudibras, or
Swift's works; but I need not tell you this. I enclose a copy, for your
amusement and opinion; which, if franks are plentiful, you may return, and save
me the tedious trouble of writing it over again. The other paper was, bona
fide, written to divert my thoughts from pain, for the same reason that I
smoaked; actions equally reputable.

Mr. Somervile's poem upon hawking, called, "Field Sports," I suppose, is out
by this time. It was sent to Mr. Lyttleton, to be read to the Prince, to whom
it was inscribed. It seems he is fond of hawking.

I have often thought those to be the most enviable people whom one least
envies -- I believe, married men are the happiest that are; but I cannot say I
envy them, because they lose all their merit in the eyes of other ladies.

I beg sincerely that you would write in a week's time at furthest, that I may
receive your letter here, if I should go from home this winter. I will never
use any thing by way of conclusion, but your old Roman

Farewell! W. SHENSTONE.

XXIV. To the same, with a Continuation of the same Subject.
June, 1742. Dear Mr. Graves!
I AM glad the stay you make in Herefordshire amuses you, even though it puts
you upon preferring the place you reside at to my own place of residence. I do
not know whether it be from the prejudice of being born at the Leasows, or from
any real beauty in the situation; but I would wish no other, would some one, by
an addition of two hundred pounds a year, put it in my power to exhibit my own
designs. It is what I can now do in no other method than on paper. I live in
such an unoeconomical manner, that I must not indulge myself in the plantation
of a tree for the future. I have glutted myself with the extremity of solitude,
and must adapt my expenses more to sociable life. It is on this account that it
seems more prudent for me to buy a chair while I am in town, than to carry down
twelve guineas for the model of the tomb of Virgil, an urn, and a scheme or two
more of like nature. -- I long to have my picture, distantly approaching to a
profile (the best manner I can think of to express myself), drawn by Davison. I
have seen your sister's, and think the face well done in every respect; -- but
am greatly indignant with other things of a less fixed nature The cap, though a
good cap enough, has a vile effect; the formality of stays, etc. not agreeable.
-- I do not know if you saw the picture of a Scotch girl there at full length!
Miss Graves has the advantage of here is, or any picture there, in her person;
but certainly this girl's hair is inexpressibly charming! There is the
genteelest negligence in it I ever saw in any picture: -- what follows, but
that I wish your sister would give orders to pull off her cap, and have hair
after the manner of this picture? -- To speak abruptly; as it is, I disapprove
it: were it altered, I should like it beyond any I ever saw. -- I am glad you
are reading Spenser: though his plan is detestable, and his invention less
wonderful than most people imagine, who do not much consider the obviousness of
allegory; yet, I think, a person of your disposition must take great delight in
his simplicity, his goodnature, etc. Did you observe a stanza that begins a
canto somewhere, Naught is there under heaven's wide hollowness
That breeds, etc.


When I bought him first, I read a page or two of the Fairy Queen, and cared
not to proceed. After that, Pope's Alley made me consider him ludicrously; and
in that light, I think, one may read him with pleasure. I am now (as Ch -- mley
with --), from trifling and laughing at him, really in love with him. I think
even the meter pretty (though I shall never use it in earnest); and that the
last Alexandrine has an extreme majesty. -- Does not this line strike you (I do
not justly remember what canto it is in); Brave thoughts and noble deeds did
evermore inspire.
Perhaps it is my fancy only that is enchanted with the running of it. Adieu!

W. S.

XXV. To the same, on the Publication of the School-mistress.
Dear Mr. Graves!
I DEPENDED a good deal on an immediate answer from you, and am greatly fearful
you never received a packet of little things, which I sent you to Oxford,
enclosed in a frank; though if arrived at all, it must have arrived several days
before you left it. I beseech you to send me a line upon the receipt of these,
which will free me from much perplexity; though it is doubtful whether I can
defer my schemes so as to make your criticisms of service. I would have you
send them notwithstanding.

I cannot help considering myself as a sportsman (though God knows how poor a
one in every sense!) and the company as my game. They fly up for a little time;
and then settle again. My cue is, to discharge my piece when I observe a number
together. This week, they are straggling round about their pasture, the town:
the next, they will flock into it with violent appetites; and then discharge my
little piece amongst them. -- I assure you, I shall be very easy about the
acquisition of any same by this thing; all I much wish is, to lose none; and
indeed I have so little to lose, that this consideration scarcely affects me.

I dare say it must be very incorrect; for I have added eight or ten stanzas
within this fortnight. But inaccuracy is more excusable in ludicrous poetry
than in any other. If it strikes any, it must be merely people of taste; for
people of wit without taste (which comprehends the larger part of the critical
tribe) will unavoidably despise it. I have been at some pains to secure myself
from A. Philips's misfortune, of mere childishness, "little charm of placid
mien, etc." I have added a ludicrous index, purely to show (fools) that I am in
jest; -- and my motto "O qua sol habitabiles illustrat oras, maxim principum",
is calculated for the same purpose. You cannot conceive how large the number is
of those that mistake burlesque for the very foolishness it exposes (which
observation I made once at the Rehearsal, at Tom Thumb, at
Chrononhotonthologos; all which are pieces of elegant humor.) I have some mind
to pursue this caution further; and advertise it, "The School-mistress, etc." A
very childish performance every body knows ( novorum more). But if a person
seriously calls this, or rather, burlesque, a childish or low species of
poetry, he says wrong. For the most regular and formal poetry may be called
trifling, folly, and weakness, in comparison of what is written with a more
manly spirit in ridicule of it. -- I have been plagued to death about the ill
execution of my designs. -- Nothing is certain in London but expense, which I
can ill bear. Believe me, till death,

Yours, sincerely and particularly, W. SHENSTONE.

XXVI. To the same; with a humourous Description of his Conduct in regard to
Form and Equipage.
The Leasows, Nov. 1742. Dear Sir,
PRESUMING you may be at Tissington by this time, I write to solicit a
description of the several adventures, accidents, and phenomenon, that have
amused you in your travels; and will equally affect me, as they relate to you.
Above all things, be particular in regard to your calculations respecting
Mickleton. I would have certainly met you there, as you desired me: there is no
company I am fonder of than yours, and your sisters; and no place at which I
have spent more agreeable hours than Mickleton. But your brother has lost one
of his recommendations in my eye; that is, his irregularity of housekeeping.
He has several left, which are sufficient to preserve my utmost esteem; but
that was a jewel indeed! I love to go where there is nothing much more in form
than myself. I have no objection to visit young, unsettled people, with a
mountebank's inconsistency in my equipage. But where a considerable family
keeps up its forms (as marriage requires) I should not care to appear with an
hired horse, and a Sancho for my valet. The case is, I could live in a way
genteel enough, and uniformly so; but then, I must forego megrims, whims, toys,
and so forth. Now, though it gives me pain, sometimes, not to appear of a
piece; yet that infrequent pain is not a balance for the substantial happiness
which I find in an urn, a seal, a snuff box, an engraving, or a bust. Ambition,
too, as it puts me upon wishing to make a figure, makes me very indifferent as
to making a common, every-day-gentlemanly figure; and saves me from appearing
solicitous about the "res mediocriter splendidae," by raising my imagination
higher. I pour out my vanity to you in cataracts; but I hope you will rather
consider it as a mark of my confidence, and, consequently, my sincere esteem
and affection: for, I take it, the former seldom subsists without the latter.
And as to what I said about my love of flattery, I hope, you will not construe
it as any hint; neither, if I am right, would you be so ungenerous as not to
comply with me. I sincerely think, that flattery amongst foes is absolutely
desirable; amongst one's common acquaintance, a behavior rather inclining to
it: but amongst friends, its consequences are of too dangerous a nature.

I am so unhappy in my wintery, unvisited state, that I can almost say with
Dido, "taedet coeli convexa tueri." I am miserable, to think that I have not
thought enough to amuse me. I walk a day together; and have no idea, but what
comes in at my eyes. I long for some subject about the size of Philips's Cider,
to settle heartily about; something that I could enrich by episodes drawn from
the English history: Stonehenge has some of the advantages I like; but seems a
dead, lifeless title. If you chance to think of a subject which you do not
choose to adorn yourself, send it me to write upon.

I shall be vastly desirous to see you here in spring; and am in hopes Whistler
will stay a month with me. I have sent an imperious letter about his dilatory
correspondence. He mentioned you in his last letter; was going to Oxford;
thence to London, where, if he stays till February, I may see him. I hope you
will write the very next post: you cannot oblige me, or please me more, than by
so doing; if you think I deserve to be pleased, or am worth obliging. Adieu!

W. S.

XXVII. To the same, from Town; with a Specimen of Plays and Politics.
From Mr Shuckburgh's, Bookseller, in Fleet Street, your Brother's Lodgings,
about 1743. Dear Mr. Graves,
I HAVE just been spending my evening at a coffee-house; and, notwithstanding
the confused effect of liquor, am sitting down to write to a person of the
clearest head I know. The truth is, I write to please myself, which I can do no
other way so effectually; upon which account, you are not obliged to me for the
advances I make in correspondence. Extraordinary things will be expected from
my situation; but extraordinary things ought never to be expected from me. I
keep no political company, nor desire any, as, I believe, you know. If you
enquire after the stage -- I have not seen Garrick; but, more fortunately for
you, your brother has. Me nothing has so much transported as young Cibber's
exhibition of Parolles, in Shakespeare's " All Is well that ends well." The
character is admirably written by the author; and, I fancy, I can discover a
great number of hints which it has afforded to Congreve in his Bluff. I am apt
to think a person, after he is twelve years old, laughs annually less and less:
less heartily, however; which is much the same. I think Cibber elicited from me
as sincere a laugh as I can ever recollect. Nothing, sure, can be comparable to
his representation of Parolles in his bully-character; except the figure he
makes as a shabby gentleman. In his first dress he is tawdry, as you may
imagine: in the last, he wears a rusty black coat, a black stock, a black wig
with a Ramillie, a pair of black gloves; and a face! -- which causes five
minutes laughter. -- Instead of politics, I have transcribed these epigrams
from the Evening Post -- though I hate transcribing: The CHOICE, to Sir ROBERT
--.
WHEN opposition against power prevailed;
When artful eloquence and bribery failed;
Timely you quit the ship you could not steer,
Disdain the commons, and ascend a peer:
Conscious that you deserve to bleed or swing,
You choose the axe as nobler than the string.
The OPPOSITION.
WITH huge Anteus as Alcides strove,
The son of Neptune one, and one of Jove,
Often as he threw the giant on the ground,
His strength redoubled by the fall he found.
The unweildy monster, sprung of mother Earth,
From her had vigor, as from her he would birth,
Enraged, the hero a new method tries;
High lifts in air, and, as he mounts, he dies.


I think the last a good thought; the first not a bad one, and what I have had
in my head a thousand times. I saw Mr. Fitzherbert at Nando's, but chose not to
reconnoitre him there, though to ask after you. I purpose waiting on him at his
lodgings, for the same end. Pray write soon to me. I wish I could say more to
deserve it from you -- I would fain deviate from the common road in every
letter I send you; but am so very uniformly your friend, that I cannot vary my
manner of expressing how much I am so, which is all my letters aim at. Adieu!

W. SHENSTONE.

XXVIII. To the same, with various Schemes of Composition.
Feb. 1743. Dear Mr. Graves,
YOU say it is no way unpleasing to you to receive my letters; if you say the
thing that is not, the fault, like others, produces its own punishment. -- You
are now my only correspondent. I do not know what reason Whistler has for not
caring to write, unless he thinks that we ought not to trouble ourselves about
one another, but bend our whole endeavors to mend our fortunes; though I do
not know his imaginations. I was afraid, after what I had said concerning
sameness in my last, that you would interpret it to your own disadvantage; but
was too lazy to write my letter again, trusting that I could deny the extent of
my complaint to any one besides myself in some future letter. There is as much
variety in your genius, as fortune can introduce into your circumstances.

Some time next week, do I purpose to set out for London. The reasons for my
going at all do barely preponderate. I cannot, conscientiously, print any
thing. I have two or three little matters in hand: none that I am greatly fond
of, much less that are at all mature. One is, what you have seen, though in its
mortal state, "Flattery, or the fatal Exotic;" -- so very quotidian and copious
a subject, that I dislike it entirely. Another, "Elegies in Hammond's Meter,"
but upon real and natural subjects: this I have objections to. A third, "An
Essay on Reserve;" the subject genteel, I think, but scarce ten lines finished.
A fourth, "An Essay, in blank Verse, on Economy, with Advice to Poets on that
Head, concluding with a ludicrous Description of a Poet's Apartment." I think
it were better to annex that poem thus, to prevent its clashing, like an
earthen pot, against Philips's silver vase, though his humor lies chiefly in
the language. My favorite scheme is a poem, in blank verse, upon Rural
Elegance, including cascades, temples, grottos, hermitages, green-houses, which
introduces my favorite episode of the Spanish lady (you will wonder how, but I
think well) to close the first book. The next, running upon planting, etc. will
end with a vista terminated by an old abbey, which introduces an episode
concerning the effects of Romish power, interdicts, etc. in imitation of
Lucretius's "Plague of Athens," taken from Thucydides, Virgil's Murrain, and
Ovid's Pestilence, etc. The two episodes in great forwardness; -- but, alas! I
do not like formal didactic poetry, and shall never be able to finish aught but
the episodes, I doubt: unless I allow myself to treat the rest in my own
manner, transiently -- as Camilla skimmed over the wheat-stubble.

I have altered this ballad, you see; I doubt, not to your mind: but send your
criticisms, and I will be all obedience, From London I will send you mine on
your more important poem; your critique will be important upon my silly affair;
mine silly, I am afraid, upon your momentous one -- but you do not think it
momentous, as you ought. Direct to Nando's. I am

Your most sincere and affectionate friend and humble servant, W. S.
I question whether I should be more unhappy in any mere mechanical employment;
for instance, making nails (which seems to deal as much in repetition as any
trade) than I am in great part of my time when my head is unfit for study. --
My neighbor is gone to London, and has left me a legacy of franks, so I shall
be able to return your poem, etc. at least by parcels. I strenuously purpose to
be there (or to set out) next week; but, as I am here at present, I think you
ought to pay some deference to the vis inertiae, at least to the centripetal
force of matter, and direct to the Leasows one more letter, with your opinion
concerning the various readings in the trifle I enclose, writing the first post
that you well can. -- Once more, adieu!

Feb. 16, 1743.


XXIX. To the same.
1743. Dear Mr. Graves,
DR. Swift would not have scrupled to print your parody, with his name to it.
Why should you, without your name? I had a violent inclination to print it in a
large folio, four leaves, price four-pence: but I dare not do it, for fear you
should think it of evil importance with regard to the clergy. You excel me
infinitely in a way in which I take most pleasure; odd picturesque description.
Send me word whether I shall print it or no -- and that right soon. -- I have
lingered in town till now, and did not receive your letter till this morning.
-- I do not know whether I shall send you with this letter a little thing which
I wrote in an afternoon, and, with proper demands of being concealed as the
author, sold for two guineas. -- Next time I am in town, I will get money like
a haberdasher. I will amuse myself with finding out the people's weak side, and
so furnish them with suitable nonsense. -- I would have you do the same. --
Make your wit bear your charges. Indeed, as to the little parody you send, it
would fix your reputation with men of sense as much as (greatly more than) the
whole tedious character of Parson Adams. I read it half a year ago; the week
after I came to town; but made Mr. Shuckburgh take it again, imagining it
altogether a very mean performance. -- I liked a tenth part pretty well; but,
as Dryden says of Horace (unjustly) he shows his teeth without laughing: the
greater part is unnatural and unhumourous. It has some advocates; but, I
observe, those not such as I ever esteemed tasters. Finally, what makes you
endeavor to like it?

My printer was preparing his bill for the School-mistress, when I stopped him
short, with a hint to go to Dodsley, who has not yet reckoned with me for
Hercules. Let the dead bury their dead. Dr. Young's Complaint is the best thing
that has come out this season (these twenty years, Pope says) except mine, for
so thinks every author, who does think proper to say so: poor Pope's history,
in Cibber's Letter, and the print of him upon the Mount of Love (the coarsest
is most humorous) must surely mortify him. Your sister does me great honor to
think my hint any thing; but I am quite zealous in my approbation of that
Scotch lady's hair. I will ever aim at oddness, for the future; it is cheaper
to follow taste than fashion, and whoever he be that devotes himself to taste
will be odd of course. -- You send me the verses on Lord Hay: they were hacked
about town three months ago, and I saw them. The town is certainly the scene
for a man of curiosity. -- I do not purpose to be long away; but I must think
of retrenching -- I have ten thousand things to tell you, but I have not room.
Such people as we should meet as regularly to compare notes as tradesmen do to
settle accounts, but oftener; there is no good comes of long reckonings; -- I
shall forget half; -- I think it should be four days in a fortnight -- it would
not do; -- it would make one mindful of, and consequently more uneasy on
account of, absence. Every one gets posts, preferments, but myself. -- Nothing
but my ambition can set me on a footing with them, and make me easy. Come then,
lordly pride! etc. The devil thought with me in Milton, All is not lost, the
unconquerable will,
And study never to submit or yield.


I have been in new companies; but I see no reason to contradict my assertion,
that I find none I like equally with you. Adieu!

W. SHENSTONE.

XXX. To Mr. JAGO, from London.
1743. Dear Friend,
I SHALL send you but a very few lines, being so much indisposed with a cold,
that I can scarce tell how to connect a sentence. I am just got into lodgings
at a goldsmith's -- a dangerous situation, you will say, for me; "Actum est,
ilicet, periisti!" Not so; -- for of late I have not so violent a taste for
toys as I have had; and I can look even on snuff-boxes "oculo irretorto."

London is really dangerous at this time; the pick-pockets, formerly content
with mere filching, make no scruple to knock people down with bludgeons in
Fleet Street and the Strand, and that at no later hour than eight o'clock at
night; but in the Piazza's, Covent Garden, they come in large bodies, armed
with couteaus, and attack whole parties, so that the danger of coming out of
the play houses is of some weight in the opposite scale, when I am disposed to
go to them oftener than I ought. -- There is a poem of this season, called "The
Pleasures of Imagination," worth your reading; but it is an expensive quarto;
if it comes out in a less size, I will bring it home with me, Mr. Pope (as Mr.
Outing, who has been with Lord Bolingbroke, informs me) is at the point of
death. -- My Lord Carteret said yesterday in the house, "That the French and
Spaniards had actually said, they would attempt a second invasion." -- There is
a new play acted at Drury Lane, "Mahomet," translated from the French of
Voltaire; but I have no great opinion of the subject, or the original author as
a poet; and my diffidence is rather improved by the testimony of those who have
seen it. -- I lodge between the two coffee-houses, George's and Nando's, so
that I partake of the expensiveness of both, as heretofore. I have no
acquaintance in town, and but slender inducement to stay; and yet, probably, I
shall loiter here for a month.

T -- H -- was knighted against his will, and had a demand made upon him for an
hundred pounds before he could get out of St. James's; so soon are felt the
inconveniencics of grandeur! -- He came out of the court in a violent rage, "G
-- d! Jack, what do think? -- I am knighted -- the devil of a knight,
e'faith!" -- I believe he was sincere in his disgust; for there had been two
barge-masters knighted in his neighborhood some time before.

I saw, coming up, Lady Fane's grotto, which, they say, cost her five thousand
pounds; about three times as much as her house is worth. It is a very beautiful
disposition of the finest collection of shells I ever saw -- Mr. Powis's woods,
which are finer. -- Mean time, if I had three hundred pounds to lay out about
the Leasows, I could bring my ambition to peaceable terms. I am, dear Sir, with
all affection, yours and Mrs. Jago's.

W. SHENSTONE.
Write soon. It is this moment reported that Pope is dead.



XXXI. To the same.
1743. Dear Sir,
I LONG heartily to talk over affairs with you tete a tete; but am an utter
enemy to the fatigue of transcribing what might pass well enough in
conversation. -- I shall say nothing more concerning my departure from L --,
than that it was necessary, and therefore excusable. -- I have been since with
a gentleman upon the borders of Wales, Bishop's Castle, from whence I made a
digression one day beyond Offa's Dyke: saw mountains which converted all that I
had seen into mole-hills; and houses which changed the Leasows into Hampton
Court: where they talk of a glazed window as a piece of magnificence; and where
their highest idea of his Majesty is, that he can ride in such a coach as
'Squire Jones or Squire Pryce's. The woman of the inn, at one pl^ce, "said,
"Glass (in windows) was very genteel, that it was; but she could not afford
such finery."

You agree with the rest of the married world in a propensity to m^ke
proselytes. This inclination in some people gives one a kind of dread of the
matter. They are ill-natured, and can only wish one in their own state because
they are unhappy; like persons that have the plague, who, they say, are ever
desirous to propagate the infection. I make a contrary conclusion when you
commend marriage, as you seem to do, when you wish Miss -- may reconcile me to
more than the name of wife. I know not what you have heard of my amor:
probably more than I can thoroughly confirm to you. And what if I should say to
you, that marriage was not once the subject of our conversation?

-- Nec conjugis unquam
Praetendi taedas, aut haec in f^dera veni.
Do not you think every thing in nature strangely improved since you were
married, from the tea-table to the warming-pan?

I want to see Mrs. Jago's handwriting, that I may judge of her temper; but
she must write something in my praise. Pray see you to it, in your next letter.

I could parodize my Lord Carteret's letter from Dettingen, if I had it by me.
"Mrs. Arnold (thanks be praised!) has this day gained a very considerable
victory. The scold lasted two hours. Mrs. S -- e was posted in the hall, and
Mrs. Arnold upon the staircase; which superiority of ground was of no small
service to her in the engagement. The fire lasted the whole space, without
intermission; at the close of which, the enemy was routed, and Mrs. Arnold kept
the field."

Did you hear the song to the tune of "The Cuckoo?"

The Baron stood behind a tree,
In woeful plight, for naught heard he
But Cannon, Cannon, etc.
O word of fear!
Unpleasing to a German ear.
The notes that fall upon the word "Cannon," express the sound with its echo
admirably.

I send you my pastoral elegy (or ballad, if you think that name more proper),
on condition that you return it with ample remarks in your next letter: I say
"return it," because I have no other copy, and am too indolent to take one.
Adieu!

W. S.

XXXII. To Mr. GRAVES, describing his Situation, and State of Health, etc.
The Leasows. Dear Mr. Graves!
TOMORROW morning I set out for Cheltenham, to make trial of the waters there.
I shall, perhaps, add to this letter at several stages, and conclude it at the
place to which I am going; so that, like those springs, you may, perhaps, find
it impregnated with the nature of all those places through which it passes;
perhaps quite the contrary.

--, if I mistake not the man, is an encourager of works of taste, etc. though
I am going to instance this oddly: he was a hearty stickler for my poem upon
Hercules at Bath, as D. Jago sent me word. Perhaps it was complaisance to Mr.
Lyttleton, with whom, Charles, etc. he is intimate, if, as I said before, I do
not mistake the person. I flatter myself, I do not; and I hope that we two
shall ever find the same persons, or the same kind of persons, our friends, and
also our enemies.

If I get over this ill habit of body, depend upon it, I will have a reverend
care of my health, as Sir John Falstaff advises the Chief Justice. I solve all
the tempests that disturb my constitution into wind: it plagues me, first, in
the shape of a bad appetite, then indigestion, then lowness of spirits and a
flux of pale water, and at night by watchings, restlessness, twitchings of my
nerves, or a sleep more distracted than the most active state of watchfulness.
But I think purging lessens all these symptoms, and I trust my scheme that I am
entering upon is right.

I was, on Monday, at Hagley, to wait on Mr. Lyttleton, who was gone to Sir
John Astley's, to see his grand edifice. -- As to Mrs. Lyttleton, if her
affability is not artificial, I mean if it does not owe its original (as it
ought to do its management) to art, I cannot conceive a person more amiable; --
but sense and elegance cannot be seigned: to exhibit them, is to have them.

How is my song set? Miss Carrington procured it that favor; but I have never
seen a copy, nor knew of its being to be printed. Howard has set another of
mine, which I received last post; but my harpsichord is out of order, and I
have found no one yet to explain the hieroglyphics which convey it. You may
probably find it in some future number of the British Orpheus. "By the side of
a stream, etc."

I am in as good spirits this instant as ever I was in my life: only "Men's
turbidum laetatur." My head is a little confused; but I often think seriously,
that I ought to have the most ardent and practical gratitude (as the Methodists
choose to express themselves) for the advantages that I have: which, though not
eminently shining, are such, to speak the truth, as suit my particular humor,
and, consequently, deserve all kind of acknowledgment. If a poet should address
himself to God Almighty, with the most earnest thanks for his goodness in
allotting him an estate that was overrun with shrubs, thickets, and coppices,
variegated with barren rocks and precipices, or floated three parts in four
with lakes and marches, rather than such an equal and fertile spot as the "sons
of men" delight in; to my apprehension, he would be guilty of no absurdity. --
But of this I have composed a kind of prayer, and intend to write a little
speculation on the subject; this kind of gratitude I assuredly ought to have,
and have. For my health, if one reflects, a country-fellow's stock of it would
be unfit for solitude; would dispose one rather to bodily feats, and, what
Falstaff calls in Poins, gambol faculties, than mental contemplations, and
would give one that kind of pain which springs from impatience. My constitution
was given me originally good; and with regard to it now (as G. Barnwell says)
"What am I? -- What I have made myself." Or, to speak with Milton, Him after
all disputes
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,
And reasonings, though through mazes, only lead
But to my own conviction. First and last
On me, me only, as the source and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due.
Though this is but vulgarly expressed in Milton neither.

Jago has been here this last week, and I drove him to Dudley Castle, which I
long to show you: I never saw it (since I was the size of my pen) before: it
has great romantic beauty, though perhaps Derbyshire may render it of small
note in your eye.

One is tempted to address the K -- as Harry the Eighth does his wife, mutatis
mutandis; Go thy ways, George!
Whoever he be that shall assert he has
A bolder king, let him in naught be trusted
For saying false in that --


I have a mind to write an ode in praise of him, and in rivalship of Cibber. --
Mine should be of the ballad style and familiarity, as expressing the
sentiments of a person returning from a dislike to a thorough approbation of
him, which seems, at present the sense of the nation. -- But herein I am not in
earnest. --

My pen has run on a whole page at random. It amuses me to encourage it, and so
I will try to get a frank.

I am this moment arrived at Cheltenham, after an expensive and fatiguing
journey. I called yesterday at Micklington; saw the portico, and snapped up a
bit of mutton at your brother's; drank a dish of tea with Miss S --; and, in
opposition to the strongest remonstrances, persisted in an endeavor to reach
Cheltenham after five o'clock. The consequence was, that, about ten, I found
myself traveling back again toward Stowe; and had undoubtedly wandered all
night in the dark, had I not been fortunately met by a waggoner's servant, who
brought me back to the worst inn but one I ever lay at, being his master's. --
Here I am: which is all I shall say in this letter.

Adieu! W. S.

XXXIII. To Mr. JAGO, on the same.
The Leasows, Saturday July the 9th, 1743. Dear Mr. Jago,
IT is not a contrived apology, or an excuse, which I am going to offer for the
disappointments I have given you. I have actually been so much out of order
ever since I wrote to you, nay, ever since I formed a design of a Sunday
expedition to L --, that it never has been in my power to execute my
intentions. My vertigo has not yet taken away my senses; God knows how soon it
may do; but my nerves are in such a condition, that I can scarce get a wink of
even disordered rest for whole nights together. May you never know the misery
of such involuntary vigils! I ride every day almost to fatigue; which only
tends to make my want of sleep more sensible, and not in the least to remove
it. I have spirits all day, good ones; though my head is dizzy, and I never
enterprise any study of greater subtlety than a news-paper. I cannot say the
journey to L -- would be at all formidable to me; for I ride about fifteen
miles, as I compute it, every day before dinner. But the nights, from home,
would be insupportable to me. I have fatigued Mrs. Arnold's assiduity, to the
injury of her health; by occasioning her to sit in my room a'nights, light my
candle, put it out again, make me perspiratory wheys, and slops; and am amused
by the most silly animadversions she is capable of making. I never knew her
usefulness till now; but I now prefer her to all of her station. If I get over
this disorder, concerning which I have bad apprehensions, you may depend upon
seeing me the first Sunday I dare venture forth. I hope you continue mending.
The benefit of riding is only not universal, and would cure me too, could I but
make one previous advance toward health. Have you tried cold bathing? Perhaps
it may not suit your case. I wish I had not dropped it. I take my fluctuation of
nerves to be caused, as that of the sea is, by wind; which I am continually
pumping up, and yet find it still renewed. When I am just sinking to sleep, a
sudden twitch of my nerves calls me back again -- to watchfulness, and
vexation! I consider myself as in the state of the philosopher, who held a
bullet betwixt his finger and thumb, which, whenever he was about to nod, was
ordered so as to fall into a large brass pan, and wake him -- that he might
pursue his lucubrations.

I will mention one circumstance regarding the weakness of my nerves; -- and
not my spirits, for I told you those were tolerable: -- the least noise that
is, even the falling of a fire-shovel upon the floor, if it happen
unexpectedly, shocks my whole frame; and I actually believe that a gun fired,
behind my back, unawares, amidst the stillness of the night, would go near to
kill me with its noise.

I am just going to bed; and dare not be any more attentive, as I hope to close
my eyes for a minute. So fare you well!

It is now six o'clock in the morning, and I have had about five hours middling
sleep; which encourages me greatly: so I will hope to be able to see you next
Sunday sevennight.

What think you of the battle? Are not you so much in love with our King, that
you could find in your heart to serve him in any profitable post he might
assign you?

Capt. L -- is wounded in the thigh.

When I ride in my chair round my neighborhood, I am as much stared and
wondered at, as a giant would be that should walk through Pall Mall. My vehicle
is at least as uncommon hereabouts as a blazing comet. My chief pleasure lies
in finding out a thousand roads, and delightful little haunts near home, which
I never dreamt of: egregious solitudes, and most incomparable bye-lanes! where
I can as effectually lose myself within a mile of home, as if I were benighted
in the deserts of Arabia. Adieu!

XXXIV. To Mr. GRAVES, written in Hay-Harvest.
July 3, 1743. Dear Mr. Graves!
I DID not part from you without a great deal of melancholy. To think of the
short duration of those interviews which are the objects of one's continual
wishes, has been a reflection that has plagued me of old! I am sure I returned
home with it then, more aggravated as I foresaw myself returning to the same
series of melancholy hours from which you had a while relieved me, and which I
had particularly suffered under all this last spring! I wish to God, you might
happen to be settled not far from me: a day's-journey distance, however; I
mean, an easy one. But the odds are infinitely against me. I must only rely for
my happiness on the hopes of a never-ceasing correspondence!

Soon after you were gone, I received my packet. The history of Worcestershire
is mere stuff. T -- I am so fond of, that, I believe, I shall have his part of
the collection bound over again, neatly and separately. But sure Hammond has no
right to the least inventive merit, as the preface-writer would insinuate. I do
not think there is a single thought, of any eninence, that is not literally
translated. I am astonished he could not content himself with being so little
an original.

Mr. Lyttleton and his lady are at Hagley. A malignant caterpillar has
demolished the beauty of all our large oaks. Mine are secured by their
littleness. But, I guess, the park suffers; a large wood near me being a mere
winter-piece for nakedness.

At present, I give myself up to riding and thoughtlessness; being resolved to
make trial of their efficacy toward a tolerable degree of health and spirits.
I wish I had you for my director. I should proceed with great confidence of
success; though I am brought very low by two or three fits of a fever since I
saw you. Had I written to you in the midst of my dispirited condition, as I was
going, you would have had a more tender and unaffected letter than I can write
at another time: what I think, perhaps, at all times; but what sickness can
alone elicit from a temper fearful of whining.

Surely the "nunc formosissimus annus" is to be limited to hay-harvest. I could
give my reasons: but you will imagine them to be the activity of country people
in a pleasing employment; the full verdure of the summer; the prime of pinks,
woodbines, jasmines, etc. I am old, very old; for few things give me so much
mechanical pleasure as lolling on a bank in the very heat of the sun, When the
old come forth to play
On a sunshine holiday --
And yet it is as much as I can do to keep Mrs. Arnold from going to
neighboring houses in her smock, in despite of decency, and my known
disapprobation.

I find myself more of a patriot than I ever thought I was. Upon reading the
account of the battle, I found a very sensible pleasure, or, as the Methodists
term it, perceived my heart enlarged, etc. The map you sent me is a pretty kind
of toy, but does not enough particularize the scenes of the war, etc. which was
the end I had in view when I sent for it.

"O dura messorum ilia!" About half the appetite, digestion, strength, spirits,
etc. of a mower, would make me the happiest of mortals! I would be understood
literally, and precisely.

Adieu! W. S.

XXXV. To the same, after the Disappointment of a Visit.
1743. Dear Sir,
I AM tempted to begin my letter as Memmius does his harangue: "Multa
medehortantur a vobis, ni studium virtutis vestrae omnia exsuperet." You
contrive interviews of about a minute's duration; and you make appointments in
order to disappoint one; and yet, at the same time that your proceedings are
thus vexatious, force one to bear testimony to the inestimable value of your
friendship! I do insist upon it, that you ought to compound for the
disappointment you have caused me, by a little letter every post you stay in
town. I shall now scarce see you till next summer, or spring at soonest; and
then I may probably take occasion to visit you, under pretense of seeing
Derbyshire. Truth is, your prints have given me some curiosity to see the
original places. I am grateful for your intentions with regard to giving me
part of them, and impertinent in desiring you to convey them to me as soon as
you can well spare them. Let me know if they are sold separately at the print
shops. I think to recommend them to my new acquaintance, Mr. Lyttleton Brown. I
like the humor of the ballad you mention, but am more obliged for your partial
opinion of me. The notes that fall upon the word "Cannon, Cannon," are
admirably expressive of the sound, I dare say: I mean, jointly with its echo;
and so, I suppose, you will think, if you ever attended to the Tower-guns. I
find I cannot afford to go to Bath previously to my London-journey; though I
look upon it as a proper method to make my residence in town more agreeable. I
shall, probably, be there about the first of December; or before, if I can
accelerate my friend Whistler's journey. The pen I write with is the most
disagreeable of pens! But I have little else to say; only this, -- that our
good friend, Jack Dolman, is dead at Aldridge; his father's benefice.

I beg, if you have leisure, you would enclose me in a frank the following
songs, with the notes: "Stella and Flavia," "Gentle Jessy," "Sylvia, will thou
waste thy prime?" and any other that is new. I should be glad of that number of
the British Orpheus which has my song in it, if it does not cost above
sixpence. Make my compliments to your brother and sister; and believe me, in
the common forms, but in no common degree,

Dear Mr. Graves's Most affectionate friend and servant, W. SHENSTONE.
The Leasows, Nov. 9th, 1743. Do write out the whole ballad of "The Baron stood
behind a tree."



XXXVI. To the same, on the Receipt of a Present of Prints.
The Leasows, Dec. 23, 1743. Dear Sir,
YOU may reasonably have expected a letter before now, either as an
acknowledgment for your genteel present, or, at least, by way of information
that I had received it. The prints have given me a pleasure, which, however
considerable, would soon have languished, if I had bought them at a shop; but
which is now built upon the esteem I have for the giver, and cannot have a more
durable foundation. -- As for the rest, I am most pleased with the view of
Matlock, and shall have no peace of mind till I have seen the original. I have
been gilding the frames, and wishing all the while for your company.

I will alter the ballad according to your advice; dividing it into three
parts, and adding a stanza or two to the shortest, some time or other. I have
had no opportunity of trying the tunes. "Arno's vale" has pretty words, and
recommends itself to one's imagination by the probability that it was written
on a real occasion. The similitude of rhimes in the close inexcusable. For all
that has been the subject of my letter hitherto, as the country people say, I
can but thank you, and I do very sincerely; though as to the songs I will repay
you.

I have your poem by me, which I have read often with the greatest pleasure. I
have many observations to make; and only defer the communication till I know
whether you have a copy at Tissington to turn to. I think, the most polite and
suitable title to it would run: -- "The Villa, a Poem; containing a Sketch of
the present Taste in Rural Embellishments, written in 1740." Your preface has a
pretty thought toward the close; otherwise is on no account to be admitted.
Pardon my freedom; but, I think, there is no manner of occasion for a preface;
and those strokes, which I know to be real modesty in you, the world will
undoubtedly impute to affectation. -- If you give me encouragement, I will be
very minute in my criticisms, allowing you to reject ten to one that you admit
of.

Whistler is gone to Bristol, and has bilked me. -- I said, he is gone; but, I
believe, he is only upon going. -- I linger at home, in hopes of gleaning up a
little health; and through a dread of being ill in a place where I can be less
attended on. -- I can continually find out something in my preceding diet that,
I think, disorders me; so that I am constantly in hopes of growing well: --
but, perhaps, I never shall; Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus aevi
Prima fugit, subeunt morbi --


When I was a schoolboy, I never knew there was any such thing as
perspiration; and now, half my time is taken up in considering the immediate
connection betwixt that and health, and endeavoring to promote it.

Mr. Lyttelton has built a kind of alcove in his park, inscribed, "SEEDS
CONTEMPLATIONIS," near his hermitage. Under the aforesaid inscription is "OMNIA
VANITAS:" -- the sides ornamented with sheeps' bones, jaws, sculls, etc.
festoon wise. In a nitch over it, an owl.

As to schemes, I have none with regard to the world, women, or books. And I
hate, and have deferred writing to you (for some days) for that reason. I am
sick of exhibiting so much sameness: -- I am constantly poring over some
Classic, which I consider as one of Idleness's better shapes. But I am
impatient to be doing something that may tend to better my situation in some
respect or other. It is encouragement can alone inspire one. Multa and
praeclare minantem
Vivere nec recte, nec suaviter --
expresses the whole of me. Thus my epistles persevere in the plaintive style;
and I question whether the sight of them does not, ere now, give you the
vapors. I have an old aunt that visits me sometimes, whose conversation is the
perfect counterpart of them. She shall fetch a long-winded sigh with Dr. Young
for a wager; though I see his Suspiria are not yet finished. He has relapsed
into "Night the Fifth." I take his case to be wind in a great measure, and
would advise him to take rhubarb in powder, with a little nutmeg grated amongst
it, as I do.

Dear Mr. G --! write down to me; and believe me to be, invariably,

Your most sincere and obliged friend, etc. W. SHENSTONE.

XXXVII. To the same, with Observations on Hypocrisy, etc.
1743. Dear Sir,
YOU must know, my last letter to you was written before I received yours from
Tissington; and I should take shame upon myself for not answering it, were I
not furnished with this excuse -- that I waited for a frank for you. -- There
are but few things I have to say to you, and such as are not worth
transcribing; yet, as our distance from one another requires it, I will scrawl
them over as negligently as I can, to let you see I lay no stress upon them. A
good excuse for laziness! you will say: and lazy enough I am, God knows! I
believe, any one who knows me thoroughly will think, that there never was so
great an inconsistence as there is betwixt my words (in my poem) and my
actions. -- This is what the world calls hypocrisy, and is determined to look
upon with peculiar aversion. But, I think, the hypocrite is a half-good
character. A man certainly, considering the force of precedent, deserves some
praise who keeps up appearances; and is, no doubt, as much to be commended for
talking better than he acts, as he is to be blamed for acting worse than he
talks. So much for casuistry. I would seem, you must know, to have some
meritorious views in talking virtuously; but who does not know that every one
who writes poetry looks directly with his face toward praise, and whatever
else his eye takes in is viewed obliquely? Praise, as I said to
foible-confessing W --, is the desired, the noted, and the adequate reward of
poetry; in which sort he that rewards me, Heaven reward him, as Sir John
Falstaff says. -- There is something very vain in repeating my own sayings; but
I could not conscientiously use a joke to you which I had used in another
letter, without owning it. -- In short, it is necessary to have some earthly
aim in view; the next world, whether it be in reality near or far off, is
always seen at a distance. All that the generality of young people can do is,
to act consistently with their expectations there. -- Now, though fame, etc. be
obviously enough in the eye of reason dissatisfactory; yet it is proper enough
to suffer one's self to be deluded with the hopes of it, that is, it is proper
to cherish some worldly hopes, that one may avoid impatience, spleen, and one
sort of despair: I mean that of having no hopes here, because one sees nothing
here that deserves them. If I were in your case, I would make all the efforts I
was able toward being a Bishop. That should be my earthly aim: not but I would
act with so much indifference as to bear all disappointment unconcernedly --
as, I dare say, you will. -- There is but one passion that I put upon an
equally sprightly footing with ambition, and that is love; which, as it
regularly tends to matrimony, requires certain favors from fortune and
circumstance to render it proper to indulge in. -- By this time you think me
crazed -- as it often happens to me to doubt, seriously, whether I am not: but
if it be the "mentis gratissimus error," I do not mind. You are very obliging
to endeavor to continue my madness and vanity. -- I should be as glad to see
Mr. Graves, your brother, as any one I know: I live in a manner wherein he
would find many things to exercise his good nature.

Pamela would have made one good volume: I wonder the author, who has some nice
natural strokes, should not have sense enough to see that. -- I beg you will
collect all the hints, etc. of your own, or others, that you think may tend to
the improvement of my poem against winter; that you would mention any flat
lines, etc. -- Write me word some time ere you come over; but write to me
immediately. I am

Yours, faithfully, W. SHENSTONE.
Once more adieu!



XXXVIII. To a Friend, with a Parody.
The Leasows, March 1, 1743-4. Dear Sir,
YOU are upon very good terms with me, and have been all along. I guessed the
causes of your silence, and have been sincerely sorry for them; not however
that I did not believe you were more happy than any one in the world who is
neither a lover nor a poet, though not able to turn himself for money-bags. --
I am really going to London; and am about the purchase of an elegant pair of
pistols from Birmingham. I indulge myself in this expense, because they shall
serve in two capacities: one while to garnish my chair, another while my horse.
And some time next week you will probably see your old friend on horseback,
armed at all points, and as very a knight, to all appearance, as any body.

-- Well! they say the Owl was a Quaker's Daughter -- one knows what one IS,
but one does not know what one SHALL be. Ophelia in Hamlet. But I digress. If I
just call to see you, God forbid that I should be burdensome to you. I will
send my horses to H --, and lodge there, or somewhere. But I am perfectly
impatient to unbosom my soul to you, and to see Mrs. Jago, whom I should have
mentioned first. -- Wednesday or Tuesday indeed seems he most likely day. --
Though I am not sure; nor do you confine yourself.

Poor Mariett! I too am emaciated; but I hope, by means of some warm weather,
to acquire plus d'embonpoint. I design to call upon him, and keep him in
countenance.

My ballad, in the midst of your hurry, must appear as ridiculous as Cinna the
poet does, when he swears nothing but death shall restrain him from addressing
Brutus and Cassius (and that the night before the battle) with two doggrel
verses -- and those the worst I have ever read; and that makes the simile the
more just. It is now a good deal metamorposed. Your parody is prodigiously
droll: the first line delights me! I think I could furnish Mrs. K -- with as
good mottoes, and as cheap, though I say it, as any body; but, alas! -- Did I
send you the following parody or no, before? I believe not. Le viola!

WHEN first, Philander, first I came,
Where Avon rolls his winding stream,
The nymphs -- how brisk! the swains -- how gay!
To see Asteria, Queen of May! --
The parsons round, her praises sung!
The steeples, with her praises rung! --
I thought -- no sight, that ever was seen,
Could match the sight of Barel's Green!
But now, since old Eugenio died --
The chief of poets, and the pride --
Now, meaner bards in vain aspire
To raise their voice, to tune their lyre!
Their lovely season, now, is over!
Thy notes, Florelio, please no more! --
No more Asteria's smiles are seen! --
Adieu! -- the sweets of Barel's Green! --
It is a kind of extempore, so excuse it. -- You have seen the song of Arno's
Vale.

I am taking part of my farm upon my hands, to see if I can succeed as a
farmer; -- but I am afraid I am under the sentence, "And, behold, whatsoever he
takes in hand, it shall not prosper."

My good friend, I sincerely confide, that, however we may be separated, no
time shall extenuate our mutual friendship. I am

Your zealous, unserviceable friend, W. SHENSTONE.

XXXIX. To Mr. GRAVES, on Social Happiness.
About 1745. Dear Mr. Graves,
THERE is not a syllable you tell me concerning yourself in your last letter,
but what applied to me is most literally true. I am sensible of the daily
progress I make toward in significancy, and it will not be many years before
you see me arrived at the ne plus ultra. I believe it is absolutely impossible
for me to acquire a considerable degree of knowledge, though I can understand
things well enough at the time I read them. I remember a preacher at St. Mary's
(I think it was Mr. E --) made a notable distinction betwixt apprehension and
comprehension. If there be a real difference, probably it may find a place in
the explication of my genius. I envy you a good general insight into the
writings of the learned. I must aim at nothing higher than a well concealed
ignorance. -- I was thinking, upon reading your letter, when it was that you
and Mr. Whistler and I went out of the road of happiness. It certainly was
where we first deviated from the turnpike road of life. -- Wives, children,
alliances, visits, etc. are necessary objects of our social passions; and
whether or no we can, through particular circumstances, be happy with, I think
it plain enough that it is not possible to be happy without them. All
attachments to inanimate beauties, to curiosities, and ornaments, satiate us
presently. -- The fanciful tribe has the disadvantage to be naturally prone to
err in the choice of lasting pleasures: and when our passions have habitually
wandered, it is too difficult to reduce them into their proper channels. When
this is the case, nothing but the change or variety of amusements stands any
chance to make us easy, and it is not long ere the whole species is exhausted.
-- I agree with you entirely in the necessity of a sociable life in order to be
happy. I do not think it much a paradox, that any company is better than none.
I think it obvious enough as to the present hour, and as to any future
influence, solitude has exceeding savage effects on our dispositions. -- I have
wrote out my elegy: I lay no manner of stress but upon the piety of it. --
Would it not be a good kind of motto, applied to a person you know, that might
be taken from what is said of Ophelia in Hamlet, I tell thee, faithless priest!
A ministering angel shall Ophelia be
When thou art howling.


I have amused myself often with this species of writing since you saw me;
partly to divert my present impatience, and partly as it will be a picture of
most that passes in my mind; a portrait which friends may value. -- I should be
glad of your profile: if you have objections, I drop my request. -- I should be
heartily glad if you would come and live with me, for any space of time that
you could find convenient. -- But I will depend on your coming over with Mr.
Whistler in the spring. I may possibly take a jaunt toward you ere long: the
road would furnish me out some visits; and, by the time I reached you, perhaps,
afford me a kind of climax of happiness. If I do not, I shall perhaps be a
little time at Bath. I do not speak of this last as a scheme from which I
entertain great expectations of pleasure. It is long since I have considered
myself as undone. The world will not perhaps consider me in that light
entirely, till I have married my maid. Adieu!

XL. To the same, with Observations on the Rebellion, and its probable
Consequences.
The Leasows, Nov. 22, 1745. Dear Mr. Graves,
MY life, for aught I see, will pass away just as it has done, without
introducing sufficient improvement into my circumstances to give a cheerful
cast to my correspondence. In one respect, in regard to my inviolable
friendship for you, I hope you will hear with some satisfaction, that I
continue still the same. And this kind of idenity, I think, I could promise
you, though every circumstance in my fortune, every particle of my body, were
changed; and others, ever so heterogeneous, substituted in their place. After
this, it would be no compliment to say, that the pretended heir to these
kingdoms could not alter it, were he to subvert the British constitution; which
must, out of all doubt, be the consequence of his success. The rebellion, you
may guess, is the subject of all conversation. Every individual nailer here
takes in a news-paper (a more pregnant one by far than any of the London ones),
and talks as familiarly of kings and princes as ever Master Shallow did of John
Gaunt. Indeed it is no bad thing that they do so; for I cannot conceive that
the people want so much to be convinced by sermons, of the absurdities of
popery, as they do by newspapers, that it may possibly prevail. The reasons
and arguments too in favor of the present Government are so strong and
obvious, that even I, and every country 'squire, and every country clerk, and
Sam Shaw the tailor, seem to be as much masters of them as the Bishops
themselves. I must not say we could express them so politely. -- I like
Secker's the best of any sermon on this occasion. He gives his audience a view
of such evil consequences from a change, as no man of sense can possibly doubt
of, when fairly stated: and, I own, I cannot see one single good it could
produce, in compensation for its inevitable and abundant mischiefs. -- I have
read Dr. Sherlock's sermon on this occasion: and I have read Mr. Warburton's;
and, at your request, I will read his Legation.

I have often thoughts of a jaunt as far as your country this winter. Some kind
of pilgrimage I must make, to avoid a lethargy. -- Public places I want to
visit a little; to peep at and renew my ideas of the world's vanity; but either
Bath or London would steep me so far in poverty, that I should not probably
emerge before the middle of next summer. I have spent this last summer
agreeably enough with some of my young relations, Mr. Dolman's children. --
They have an excellent taste for their years. -- I have been upon several
jaunts with the son to Ditchfield, Worcester, Mr. Fletcher's, etc. amusing him,
what I could, under the loss of his father. Miss W -- F -- asked very earnestly
after you. Two of the sisters have been with me at the Leasows, and upon
several parties of pleasure in my chair. -- Broom is disposed of -- I do not
understand upon what inducement. -- After all, I am miserable; -- conscious to
myself that I am too little selfish: that I ought now or never to aim at some
addition to my fortune; and that I make large advances toward the common
catastrophe of better poets, poverty -- I never can attend enough to some
twelve-penny matter, on which a great deal depends. -- My amor, so far as I
indulge it, gives me some pleasure, and no pain in the world. -- I have read
Spenser once again, and I have added full as much more to my School-mistress,
in regard to number of lines; something in point of matter (or manner rather)
which does not displease me. I would be glad if Mr. -- were, upon your request,
to give his opinion of particulars, for two reasons; as you say he has some
taste for this kind of writing, and as he is my enemy, and would therefore,
find out its deficiencies.

I have a reason of a most whimsical kind, why I would wish you to preserve
this letter. Pray write soon, and believe me most affectionately

Your friend and humble servant, W. SHENSTONE.

XLI. To the same, with Remarks on the Execution and Behavior of the Lords
Kilmarnock and Balmerino.
1746, ineunte anno. Dear Mr. Graves,
I BELIEVE it is impossible for me to disagree with you on any other score,
than the scanty pittances you allot me of your company; and, if I have
disclosed any symptoms of resentment on that account, you will, perhaps,
overlook them, out of regard to the motive from which they proceeded. -- I
thank you for your perusal of that trivial poem. If I were going to print it, I
should give way to your remarks implicitly, and would not dare to do otherwise.
But so long as I keep it in manuscript, you will pardon my silly prejudices, if
I choose to read and show it with the addition of most of my new stanzas. I own,
I have a fondness for several, imagining them to be more in Spenser's way, yet
more independent on the antique phrase, than any part of the poem; and, on that
account, I cannot yet prevail on myself to banish them entirely; but were I to
print, I should (with some reluctance) give way to your sentiments (which I
know are just), namely, that they render the work too diffuse and flimsy, and
seem rather excrescences than essential parts of it.

But of these things I say no more now. I purpose staying a month with Mr.
Whistler in December, if it suits him; and then I hope I shall have a great
deal of your company. Let me hear something in your next of your domestic
affairs. I beg you would not make any grand decision, without giving me some
previous information. I esteem this as due to the friendship I have so long
professed for you, and from the friendship you have so long professed for me.

I look upon the death of the two Lords as equally decent upon their respective
principles. Lord Kilmarnock, I suppose, joined the rebels through a view of
bettering his circumstances, conscious to himself that he was guilty of a crime
the moment he did so. This is agreeable to his speech before the Lords, and to
that melancholy which he discovered upon the scaffold. Death, aggravated by
guilt, would sit heavier upon him than upon the other, even supposing him to
have had the same resolution. Balmerino's life was quite unie, and his death
equal to the character he aimed at. We are to observe, that he meant to suffer
as a Friend to the Stuarts, a Soldier, and a Scotsman. The first he manifested
when he came out of the Tower, by his reply of "God save King J -- s;" the
second, by his dress, and numberless ostentations of intrepidity; the last, by
his played nightcap. Did you hear the story of his sending a message to Lord
Kilmarnock? "that he had been practicing how to lie upon the block, and had
found out, the easiest way of receiving the blow was, to bite his tongue hard:
or even if he bit it off, it was no matter, they should have no farther use for
it." His behavior seems to have wanted coolness, or else to equal that of
Adrian, Cato, Sir T. More, etc. or any of those heroes who had spirit enough to
make an ostentation of their unconcern. I had, from the printed accounts of
their behavior, an idea of their persons, exactly consormable to the
description I read afterward in your paper; -- but enough -- you send me
sterling matters of fact, and I return you tinsel observations. -- I thank you
for accenting Cro^mertie and Balme^ri^no; I learnt Culloden from you before.

I have had little company since I saw you. -- One day indeed I was surprised
by a visit from Mr. Thomson, Author of the Seasons. -- Mr. Lyttelton introduced
him. -- I have not room to tell you all that passed. -- They praised my place
extravagantly; -- proposed alterations, etc. Thomson was very facetious, and
very complaisant; invited me to his house at Richmond. There were many things
said worth telling, but not writing to you. -- This has been a summer that I
have spent more socially than any one these three years. I expect a good deal
more company this week, the next, and the week after. -- Lady Luxborough talks
of coming, and I believe will, -- The visit would bring my little walks into
repute. -- When will the time come, that I shall enjoy your company here a
month uninterrupted? Dear Sir,

Yours most faithfully, W. SHENSTONE.

XLII. To the same, with a new Theory of Political Principles.
Dear Mr. Graves,
I HAVE lately received a letter from Mr. Whistler, which conveys your
compliments to me, and, by so doing, prompts me to acknowledge the receipt of
your last kind letter. I observe you adhere strictly to the apostolical precept
of being "swift to hear, slow to speak;" the latter part of which I would fain
conclude you understand too literally.

Your neighbor, I see, is not a little embarrassed with his mills at
Whitchurch. I have long had an eye upon his advertisement in the London Evening
Post, and been not a little scandalized thereat. What has the name of a poet to
do with the publication of lands and tenements? or the idea of harmony with the
noise of a water-mill? yet has he extracted music from the subject, and mirth
from his misfortunes; having sent me a ballad upon the miller, written with
much ease and some drollery.

As to the light in which you place your present fortunes, I can only say, that
you have not that situation I could wish you for your own sake: for so far as I
am concerned in your elevation, I can assure you very faithfully, that no
circumstances in the world could more endear you to my affection, or recommend
you to my respect, than the present. My affection, you will easily observe,
from the very nature of affection in general, would stand no chance to be
increased by your promotion; and as for respect, if I knew the degree you
desired, I would acquit myself of it to your satisfaction now; and were you
settled at Lambeth, I should expect that you would require no more from me upon
that account; at least in private: so that, so far as either deference or
friendship is concerned, you are an Archbishop to me to all intents and
purposes. -- As to figure in the world, it depends much, I know, upon
advancement; and yet even here you will be ever sure of that kind of weight
which ingenuity gives; discernable to the smaller indeed, but undoubtedly the
more valuable part of the world; -- but this is improper, as it is philosophy,
and as it is advice; neither of which is it suitable for me to suggest to you
-- "Alcinoo Poma, etc." As to the long series of my lamentations, I will not
now enter upon the reasonableness of them. It is a subject, to tell you the
truth, on which you cannot reply without some danger of hurting me. -- As for
politics (you will blame this letter for dwelling so much upon the subject of
yours;) but as for politics, I think poets are tories by nature, supposing them
to be by nature poets. -- The love of an individual person or family, that has
worn a crown for many successions, is an inclination greatly adapted to the
fanciful tribe. On the other hand, mathematicians, abstract-reasoners, of no
manner of attachment to persons, at least to the visible part of them, but
prodigiously devoted to the ideas of virtue, liberty, and so forth, are
generally whigs. It happens agreeably enough to this maxim, that the whigs are
friends to that wise, plodding, unpoetical people the Dutch. -- The Tories, on
the other hand, are taken mightily with that shewy, ostentatious nation the
French. Foxhunters, that reside amongst the beauties of nature, and bid
defiance to art, in short, that have intellects of a poetical turn, are
frequently tories; citizens, merchants, etc. that scarce see what nature is,
and consequently have no pretensions to a poetical taste, are, I think,
generally argumentative and whiggish; -- but perhaps I carry this too far. --
Something there is in it however, you will see: not that I would apply what I
here say to particular revolutions, etc. I would only advance something general
and speculative. Nor would I approve or condemn by this any one set of people
now existing. Nor would I have you pretend to fish out my party from any thing
I have said; for I am of none. -- The letter I sent you last was occasional,
and when I see you I will tell you the occasion. I absolutely agree with you in
every tittle of your political observations. -- I am glad I do; for I know the
poisonous nature of party: and though we are neither violent, yet I should fear
it. My schemes are doubtful at present, but my face is set toward Bath. -- I
am confident of the service those waters would do me. -- I hope you will
exhilarate me with a letter soon. -- I would fain have furnished out a letter
to amuse you after so long a silence, but I find myself unable: even as unable
as I am to express the regard with which I am

Yours, W. SHENSTONE.
The Leasows, April 6, 1746.
XLIII. Continuation of the same.
The Leasows, May 11, 1746. Dear Mr. Graves,
THOUGH I feel an irresistible propensity to write to you this very post, yet I
cannot say that I am able to advance any thing tending either to your own or my
satisfaction. -- What is worst of all is, I cannot fix the time of seeing you
with so much precision as I would always endeavor where my pleasure is so much
concerned -- I will tell you the whole affair. -- I have for a long season
proposed to drink the Bath waters this spring; and did think of setting out in
a week's time, when I received your letter, purposing to stay there a month;
and from thence take a circuit which should indulge me in a sight of you, Mr.
Whistler, and some few others in my way home. The latter part of this scheme
(though far the more agreeable to me) was rather doubtful and precarious;
depending (as you express it) on the state of my finances after a month's
continuance at Bath; which I considered, and do consider, as a very probable
means of bettering my constitution. -- Now I covet to see you so much, that I
would bring nothing but health in competition. -- What I wish is, that you
could, with convenience, either hasten or delay your journey, that you might
find me before mine, or after my return, though I should infinitely, and for
many reasons, prefer the former. I long to talk with you particularly now. I
have much to say in regard to our friend's amor, to which you alluded in your
last. I request it as a favor of you, that you would conjure him, by the
friendship I have ever borne him, and by any esteem which he has ever professed
for me, that he would do nothing very material in the affair till I have talked
it over, and given him my faithful sentiments, "quod censet amiculus."

I am not willing the balance should turn entirely on the whig side: I would
give it a greater equilibrium, if the following suggestion might effect it.
Tories, I said, have great, and sometimes partial affections for the person of
a king. -- We will suppose that kings are alternately good and bad: their
loyalty to the good one is commendable; their partiality to the bad one not to
be vindicated. Whigs have no passion, no gratitude, toward to the good prince:
there they are wrong. They are severe upon the bad one, in which they are
justifiable. I wish I had not begun these wholesale distinctions, this
miserable specimen of my politics. I protest against all epistolary disputes. I
am now embarrassed in one, on much such another score, which fills up all my
letter; for I love the last word, like a scold or a child. -- I thank you for
your little anecdotes from time to time: you may depend upon it, that I have
never heard any thing before; for I never do hear any thing. -- I am one very
thankful letter in debt to your neighbor Whistler. I have at present nothing
but the propensity of a good correspondent; but I will write soon. In the mean
time, if you see him, ask him if he goes to Bath or Bristol this season. -- I
beg you would write to me directly when you can come, and how I may regulate my
motions so as to be best assured of seeing you. -- Pray do not neglect a post.
I am

Yours most entirely, W. S.

XLIV. To the same, on the Mixture of Pleasure and Pain.
The Leasows, June the last, 1747. Dear Mr. Graves,
IT is now, I believe, near half a year since I had the favor of a letter from
you. When I wrote last, I discovered a more than ordinary solicitude for one
immediate answer. It puzzles me to account for your unusual silence, otherwise
than upon supposition of some offense you have taken: and it puzzles me as much
to guess by what behavior of mine I have been so unhappy as to give you that
offense.

I am vain enough to imagine that the little merit I have, deserves somewhat
more regard than I have met with from the world. Be that as it will, the
disappointment I must undergo, by any appearance of neglect from the friends I
value, would more effectually dispirit me than any other whatsoever.

I have published my design of visiting you, and Mr. Whistler in Oxfordshire,
to all the world. A thousand incidents have hitherto interfered with it, which
I will not now recount. But when I look back upon the regular succession of
them, it looks as if Destiny had some hand in detaining me. The most vigorous
of my hopes dwell upon seeing you next winter, though I am not a little
indulgent to those that tell me I may see you long before.

I have brought my place here to greater perfection than it has ever yet
appeared in; and, with the mob, it is in some vogue. Nevertheless, I do not
know that I ever relished it less in my life than I have done this summer. Bad
health, bad spirits, no company to my mind, and no correspondences, are enough
to blast the sweetest shades, and to poison the purest fountains. Some of these
misfortunes I can impute to my own misconduct, and it embitters them. The two
last I can less account for, having at all times done all I was able to
recommend myself to my friends, behaving at the same time with courtesy to the
rest of the world. The fact is not true; otherwise I might resolve it into
this, that I alone am idle, and all the world is busy.

I fancy you will imagine I lay too much stress upon Mr. Thomson's visit, when
I mention the following inscription upon a seat in Virgil's grove. CELEBMO.
POETAE Quae tibi quae tali reddam pro carmine dona?
Nam neque me tantum venientis The verse whispers here.
sibilus Austri,
Nec percussa juvant fluctu tam litora, nec quae
Saxosas inter decurrunt flumina valles.
VIRG. I want your opinion of it, and whether it were not better thus, --
THOMSON, But you will discover at first glance an impropriety in both. -- Now I
am upon inscriptions, I send you one from a coin dug up very near me a few
weeks ago. Round the head, IMP (...) V AVG GER DAC MOn the reverse, S P Q R
OPTIMO PRINCIPI COS VI Within which is an human figure sitting, with one hand
reclined upon a wand; the other, as I take it, holding forth an olive. I have
given my opinion, it is one of Trajan's; and my virtuoso character will rest
upon the truth of it. It is a silver coin, but very obscure. -- There appears a
large mass of ruins, rough stone, very strongly cemented, where they found it.
-- If you were here, it might amuse you.

Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. -- I have so
settled a notion of the proportionate mixture of pleasure and pain in this
life, that I expect one to succeed the other as naturally as day and night. I
own, this is owing to the soul as much as to outward incidents. Sorrow prepares
it for mirth, and vice versa. -- The durations of both differ. Last summer I
spent agreeably; this quite otherwise, Today I have been quite melancholy; I
expect happiness tomorrow from either an aptitude of mind, or some incident
sufficient to overcome its inaptitude. -- Perhaps that incident may be a letter
from you; I wish it may, and am most truly

Yours, W. S.
I had a coin of Vespasian given me to day, and I begin a collection: if you
have any duplicates, you will please to oblige me. -- I want to correct my
elegies, by your assistance. -- I will begin no more.



XLV. To the same, with Thoughts on Advice.
The Leasows, Sept. 21, 1747. Dear Mr. Graves,
I AM under some apprehension that you dread the sight of a letter from me, as
it seems to lay claim to the compliment of an answer. I will therefore write
you one that shall wave its privilege, at least till such time as your leisure
encourages, or your present dissipation does not forbid you to send one. -- I
dare now no longer expatiate upon the affair you have in hand; it is enough for
me, if you will excuse the freedom I have taken. I have often known delay
produce good effects in some cases which even sagacity itself could not
surmount; and, if I thought I did not go too far, would presume to recommend it
now. You know I have very little of the temper of an alderman. I almost hate
the idea of wealthiness as much as the word. It seems to me to carry a notion
of fullness, stagnation, and insignificancy. It is this disposition of mine that
can alone give any weight to the advice I send you, as it proves me not to give
it through any partiality to fortune. As to what remains, you are, I hope,
assured of the value I must ever have for you in any circumstances, and the
regard I shall always show for any that belongs to you. I cannot like you less
or more. -- I now drop into other matters. Bergen, I see, is taken at lost;
pray what are the sentiments of your political companions? I dined some time
ago with Mr. Lyttelton and Mr. Pit, who both agreed it was worth twenty
thousand men to the French; which is a light in which I never used to consider
it. Any little intimation that you please to confer upon me, enables me to seem
wise in this country for a month; particularly if I take care to adjust my face
accordingly. As I was returning last Sunday from church, whom should I meet in
my way, but that sweet-souled bard Mr. James Thomson, in a chaise drawn by two
horses lengthways. -- I welcomed him into the country, and asked him to
accompany Mr. Lyttelton to the Leasows (who had offered me a visit) which he
promised to do. So I am in daily expectations of them and all the world this
week. I fancy they will lavish all their praises upon nature, reserving none
for poor art and me. But if I ever live, and am able to perfect my schemes, I
shall not despair of pleasing the sew I first began with; the few friends
prejudiced in my favor, and then "Fico por los malignatores." Censures will
not affect me; for I am armed so strong in vanity, that they will pass by me as
the idle wind which I regard not. I think it pretty near equal, in a country
place, whether you gain the small number of tasters, or the large crowd of the
vulgar. The latter are more frequently met with, and gape, stupent, and stare
much more. But one would choose to please a few friends of taste before mob or
gentry, the great vulgar or the small; because therein one gratifies both one's
social passions and one's pride, that is, one's self-love. Above all things, I
would wish to please you; and if I have a wish that projects or is prominent
beyond the rest, it is to see you placed to your satisfaction near me; but
Fortune must vary from her usual treatment before she favors me so far. -- And
yet there was a time, when one might probably have prevailed on her. I knew not
what to do -- The affair was so intricately circumstanced -- your surprising
silence after the hint I gave. -- Mr. D -- offering to serve any friend of
mine; nay, pressing me to use the opportunity. -- His other relations, his
guardians, teizing him with sure symptoms of a rupture in case of a refusal on
their side. -- Mr P -- soliciting me if the place were sold, which it could not
legally be. Friendship, propriety, impartiality, self-interest (which I little
regarded) endeavoring to distract me; I think I never spent so disagreeable an
half-year since I was born. To close the whole, I could not foresee the event,
which is almost foretold in your last letter, and I knew I could not serve you;
but I must render it a necessary one. In short, when can tell you the whole
affair at leisure, you will own it to be of such a nature, that I must be ever
in sus^ence concerning my behavior, and of course shall never reflect on it
with pleasure. Believe me, with the truest affection,

Yours, W. SHENSTONE.

XLVI. To a Friend, from The Leasows.
1747. Dear Sir,
IT is not much above two hours since I received your obliging letter, and I am
already set down to answer it. -- To speak the truth, I had almost given you
over: I imagined you had taken umbrage at some expression or circumstance in my
epistle, and were determined to make me sensible you did so, by your silence. I
hope, this error of mine will serve to establish one rule on both sides. -- It
is what ought, I am sure, always to take place, where people wish a perpetuity
of friendship. I mean, never, upon circumstances of disrespect, to admit of
circumstantial evidence.

I am very grave, so you may depend on the sincerity of all I shall say, I saw
several beauties in your former elegy; but though it was "formosa," it did not
appear to me "ipsa forma." I like this that you have now sent very much. It has
a simplicity which your last a little wanted, and has thought enough. I begin
to be seldom pleased with the compositions of others, or my own; but I could be
really fond of this, with a sew alterations, that I could propose: -- but you
must know, at the same time, that these are such as no one would approve beside
myself. -- I know it. However there are some seeming faults in it.

I have been greatly mortified in my correspondents of late. -- I even said in
my haste, All friends are faithless. -- G, after a month's expectation, which
he had confirmed to me, of seeing him here, let me know about a fortnight
since, that I had more leisure than him; and since it did not suit his
convenience to come, I ought to take the opportunity of visiting him, and
seeing Derbyshire while he continues in it. -- W -- has not wrote to me these
six weeks. -- Outing has been, moreover, dumb for the same space of time; and I
purpose in my heart to behave with some distance toward both, for this neglect
(see my rule of circumstantial evidence).

It is a pity you cannot spare a day or two to come and see me. My wood grows
excessively pleasant, and its pleasantness vexes me; because nobody will come
that can taste it.

Your health, according to your description, is much the same with mine; but
from the gaiety of your style and designs, I collect that it is greatly better.

I have an alcove, six elegies, a seat, two epitaphs (one upon myself), three
ballads, four songs, and a serpentine river, to show you when you come. Will
the compositions come safe to you, if I send my book, which contains the only
copies of several things (which I could not remember if they were lost)? -- but
I will not send them. If my horse gets well, I may essay a visit for two days,
and bring them with me, that I may make comments while you read them, as
beseems a genuine author to do.

I am raising a green-house from the excrescences of Lord Dudley's; but I do
not find that "vient l'appetit en mangeant," that I grow fonder of my
collection proportionable as it increases.

I should think myself fortunate enough at present, if, like you, I could only
find that I had been mentioned for a vacant post; but I have withdrawn all my
views from court-preferment, and fixed them on finding a pot of money, which I
determine to be the far more probable scheme.

I have little health and frequent mortification, so that no one need envy me;
and yet, I believe, there are that do Are any enviable but such as are
unambitious? I never shall be able to reckon myself of that tribe, which have
engrossed all happiness to themselves, and left the rest of the world nothing
but hopes and possessions. Yet I do not much feel the pains of ambition, while
I am conversing with ingenious friends of my own level: but in other company it
hurts me. Let me advise you, now I think of it, to dread the company of silly
people, out-of-the-way people, and, in one word, what men of genius call the
vulgar. You run ten times the risque of being mortified, voluntarily or
unknowingly, amongst the latter of these, to what you do amongst men of sense
and politeness, be they ever so malicious; -- but my paper is filled.

Do write soon.

XLVII. To the same.
It is somewhere about the 20th of Sept. 1747, and I write from The Leasows,
Dear Sir,
I THINK I have lived to out correspond almost all my correspondents; whether
you are the last that is to be subdued, I will not say; the rest are so
fatigued, that they are not able to atchieve a line. Apprized of this, and
being by nature disposed to have mercy on the vanquished, "parcere subjectis,"
I seldom write a syllable more than is requisite to further some scheme, or
ascertain some interview, the latter of these being the purpose of this mine
epistle. I am in great hopes I shall be at liberty to see you ere many weeks be
past; and would beg of you, in the mean time, to inform me, by a letter, when I
am likely, or when very unlikely, to meet you at home. I am detained, just at
present, by continual expectations of the Hagley family.

As I was returning from church on Sunday last, whom should I meet in a chaise,
with two horses lengthways, but that right friendly bard, Mr. Thompson? I
complimented him upon his arrival in this country, and asked him to accompany
Mr. Lyttelton to The Leasows, which he said he would with abundance of
pleasure; and so we parted. You will observe, that the more stress I lay upon
this visit, and the more I discover to you, the more substantial is my apology
for deferring mine into Warwickshire. I own, I am pleased with the prospect of
showing them something at The Leasows beyond what they expect. I have begun my
terras on the high hill I showed you, made some considerable improvements in
Virgil's grove, and finished a walk from it to the house, after a manner which
you will approve. They are going to build a castle in the park round the lodge,
which, if well executed, must have a good effect; and they are going likewise
to build a rotund to terminate the visto. The fault is, that they anticipate
every thing which I propose to do when I become rich; but as that is never
likely to be, perhaps it is not of any importance; -- but what I term rich,
implies no great deal; I believe, you are a witness to the moderation of my
desires; and I flatter myself that you will believe your friend in that respect
something above the vulgar.

Creed non illum tibi de scelesta
Plebe dilectum, neque sic fidelem,
Sic lucro aversum, potuisse nasci
Patre pudendo.
If I come to your house, positively I will not go to see Mr. M --. He has been
twice as near me as The Grange, with C -- L --, and never deemed my place worth
seeing. I doubt, you are a little too modest in praising it wherever you go. --
Why don't you applaud it with both hands, "utroque pollice?" -- "Parcentes ego
dexteras odi, sparge rosas." -- I am so very partial to my native place, that
it seems a miracle to me that it is not more famous. But I complain unjustly of
you; for, as you have always contributed to my happiness, you have taken every
opportunity to contribute to my figure. I wish I could say the same of some who
have it more in their power.

I have yet about a thousand things to say to you -- not now, though. -- Lady L
-- h's visit I reserve till I see you. A coach with a coronet is a pretty kind
of phenomenon at my door -- few prettier, except the face of such a friend as
you; for I do not want the grace to prefer a generous and spirited friendship
to all the gewgaws that ambition can contrive. I have wrote out my elegies, and
heartily wish you had them to look over before I come. -- I know not how to
send them. -- I shall bring and leave some poetry with you. -- "Thus and
odores!" or rather a proper covering for "Thus and odores, and piper, and
quicquid chartis amicitur ineptis."

Adieu! dear Sir, Believe me ever yours, W. SHENSTONE.

XLVIII. To the same, with a Song.
1747. Dear Sir,
BEING just returned from a small excursion, it was with the utmost pleasure
that I read over your letter; and though it abounds both in wit and waggery, I
sit down incontinently to answer it with none.

The agreeableness of your letters is now heightened by the surprise they give
me. I must own, I have thought you in a manner lost to the amusements in which
you once delighted, correspondences, works of taste and fancy, etc. If you
think the opinion worth removing, you need only favor me with such a letter
now and then, and I will place you (in my imagination) where you shall see all
the favorites of fortune cringing at your feet.

I think I could add about half a dozen hints to your observations on
electricity, which might at least disguise the facts; and then why will you not
put it into some news-paper, or monthly pamphlet? you might discover yourself
to whom you have a mind. It would give more than ordinary pleasure at this
time. -- Some other will take the hint. -- Pity your piece should not have the
advantage of novelty as well as wit!

I dined and stayed a night with Dr. E --; he was extremely obliging, and I am
glad of such a friend to visit at B. He asked much after you. -- He showed me
his Ovid -- I advised him to finish some one epistle highly, that he might show
it. -- The whole will not take, though it goes against me to tell him so. I
should be glad he could succeed at B.; and could I serve him, it would be with
a safe conscience; for I take him to excel the rest of B. physicians far in
point of speculation and diligence, etc.

I send you the song you asked for, and request of you to write me out your new
edition of the election verses; and, at your leisure, a copy of the poem which
we altered.

THE LARK.
GO, tuneful bird, that gladd'st the skies,
To Daphne's window speed thy way,
And there on quivering pinions rise,
And there thy vocal art display.
And if she deign thy notes to hear,
And if she praise thy matin song;
Tell her, the sounds that sooth her ear,
To simple British birds belong.
Tell her, in livelier plumes arrayed,
The bird from Indian groves may shine
But ask the lovely, partial maid,
What are his notes compared to thine?
Then bid her treat that witless beau,
And all his motley race with scorn;
And heal deserving Damon's woe,
Who sings her praise, and sings forlorn.
I am, Sir, Your most faithful friend and servant, W. SHENSTONE.
Have you read Watson, Martyn and Freke, on electricity? I accidently met with
the two former, by which my head is rendered almost giddy -- electrics,
non-electrics, electrics per se, and bodies that are only conductors of
electricity, have a plaguey bad effect on so vortical a brain as mine.

I will infallibly spend a week with you, perhaps about February, if it suits
you; though I think too it must be later.

I have been painting in water colors, during a visit I made, flowers. I would
recommend the amusement to you, if you can allow it the time that is expedient.

I trust you will give me one entire week in the spring, when my ^e alterations
may exhibit themselves to advantage.



XLIX. To the same, after a Visit.
Sunday, Feb. 14, 1747-8. Dear Mr. Jago,
I AM tempted once more to apologize for the the unseasonable visit I paid you,
though I feel myself entirely innocent in that respect, even as much as the
post-boy was guilty; for had my previous letter arrived in due time, you had
then been furnished with an opportunity of waving my company till a more
convenient season. I was only, or, at least, chiefly uneasy upon your account.
I spent my time very agreeably, and only less so than I might, had I not been
conscious to myself, that I was intruding upon domestic tendernesses.

I spent the Sunday night and the next day at Mr. Wren's; and am now just
returned from Mr. Dolman's, who has made me a genteel present of Spence's
Polymetis. I have not yet read many dialogues in it, but I have dipped in
several; and have reason to be well enough satisfied with the simple and
uninvidious manner in which he has introduced Mr. Lowth's poem. I have long
known of this intended introduction (which I accidentally found to have to have
been settled betwixt them before I published mine on the same subject), and a
little dreaded the form of it. I have long ago made considerable improvements
in mine, and have a mind one day to publish it once more; after which, let it
sleep in peace. I have sometimes thought of printing my next title page thus,
viz. "Poems; consisting of Songs, Odes, and Elegies, with an improved edition
of The Judgment of Hercules, and of The Shool-mistress." But I have but very
few critical acquaintance, and I live at a great distance from those I have;
stationed amongst the makers and the wearers of hob-nails; Far from the joys
that with my soul agree,
From wit, from learning -- very far from thee.
PARNELL. I know I have thrown a great number of careless things into your
hands. I know to whom I entrusted my follies; but I know not what they are: --
I believe, in general, that they consist of mis-begotten embryos and abortive
births, which it had been merely decent to have buried in -- some part of my
garden; but I was morally assured, that you would expose nothing of mine to my
disadvantage. As to some that are less imperfect, you promised your
observations, and I desire you would make them with the utmost freedom. I can
bear any censure which you shall pass by way of letter, and I beg once more
that you would not be sparing. It will be esteemed as great a favor as you can
do me. When they have gone through your hands, and those of one or two more
friends, I shall, perhaps, think of publishing them; though as to that, much
depends upon the advice I receive, and previously on the opportunity I have of
receiving. I am in hopes that you will be pretty full in discovering to me,
which you dislike the least, what faults you find, and what improvements they
are capable of. I set you a tedious task; but I will return the favor as far
as I am able, either in the same way or any other. This brings me to say, that,
if there be any compositions of yours that you would have me to correct (and
there are several of which I want a copy), I would beg you to send them. Your
Blackbird excels any singing-bird I ever heard, and I beseech you to convey it
to The Leasows by the next opportunity, that he may acquire some near other
^ills, and in other valleys, than those in which he was produced. -- I have
many compliments to make in your country; to Mr. H --, Mrs. N --, Mrs. J --,
Mr. F --, Mr. T --, and your brother. If I go over to Mr. W -- 's, I will
assuredly call and spend a night with you. -- That is precarious. -- But
whether I do or not, I would willingly hope to see you this spring and summer
more than once; as a critic and as a friend: nor do I forget the promise of Mr.
H -- and Mr. F --; -- but of these things more when I send for the papers,
which I purpose to do tomorrow fortnight, that is, the twenty-ninth of
February.

I have suffered greatly by railing at the black button on a parson's great
coat. Had Mr. Hall's been thus distinguished, he could not have mistaken mine
for his own; which latter I sent in order to be commuted at Birmingham, and was
almost starved to death before I could accomplish the exchange. There is no
trifling with any part of orthodoxy with impunity. -- That is the moral.

I have received a very obliging letter from Lady Luxborough, wherein she tells
me, that Lady Hartford admires my place in her description. Mr. Thomson is
intimate at Lady Hartford's; and I suppose Lady Hartford may have been informed
by L. L. that Mr. Thomson has been here; so I conclude, in mere vanity, that my
farm is advancing in reputation.

What think you of Mr. Carte's History? or what of his narrative concerning the
Pretender's touching for the King's evil? I think one is not, however, to give
up his book entirely; because, with all his superstition, he may have several
anecdotes that one would like to read.

I have had great expectations from the beautiful veins of a piece of oak of
which I have had a table made; but, upon a thorough survey of it, it is so like
nothing in the world as old B -- 's callimanco nightgown..

I have nothing to add worth beginning upon another page; but I happened not to
make a regular conclusion in my preceding one.

You must give me some time to color you a collection of flowers (that octavo
edition I showed you here); and then I will make Mrs. Jago a present of it. I
believe I can engage Mr. Dolman to assist me, who is much my superior in point
of accuracy; and the inscription at the beginning is to run somehow thus:
ELEGANTISSIMAE PVELLAE That is, by trade a garland-maker; but this inscription
I may alter, if I can think of any thing more expressive of the regard which I
have ever borne and still bare you.

Lord Dudley is gone, and franks are no more. I have nothing to wish you but
health and preferment; -- "det vitam, det opes; -- " with these you will easily
compound that cordial happiness, having every other ingredient that is
requisite at hand.

I am most affectionately, Your very faithful friend, etc. W. SHENSTONE.

L. To Mr. JAGO,
The Leasows, Mar. 23, 1747-8. Dear Sir,
I HAVE sent Tom over for the papers which I left under your inspection; have
nothing to to add upon this head, but that the more freely and particularly you
give me your opinion, the greater will be the obligation which I shall have to
acknowledge.

I shall be very glad, if I happen to receive a good large bundle of your own
compositions; in regard to which, I will observe any commands which you shall
please to lay upon me.

I am favored with a certain correspondence, by way of letter, which I told
you I should be glad to cultivate; and I find it very entertaining.

Pray did you receive my answer to your last letter, sent by way of London? I
should be extremely sorry to be debarred the pleasure of writing to you by the
post, as often as I feel a violent propensity to describe the notable incidents
of my life; which amount to about as much as the tinsel of your little boy's
hobbyhorse.

I am on the point of purchasing a couple of busts for the niches in my hall;
and believe me, my good friend, I never proceed one step in ornamenting my
little farm, but I enjoy the hopes of rendering it more agreeable to you, and
the small circle of acquaintance, who sometimes favor me with their company.

I shall be extremely glad to see you and Mr. Fancourt when the trees are
green; that is, in May; but I would not have you content yourself with a single
visit this summer. If Mr. Hardy (to whom you will make my compliments) inclines
to favor me so far, you must calculate so as to wait on him whenever he finds
it convenient; though I have better hopes of making his reception here
agreeable to him when my Lord Dudley comes down. -- I wonder how he would like
the scheme I am upon, of exchanging a large tankard for a silver standish.

I have had a couple of paintings given me since you were here. One of them is
a Madona, valued, as it is said, at ten guineas in Italy, but which you would
hardly purchase at the price of five shillings. However, I am endeavoring to
make it out to be one of Carlo Maratt's, who was a first hand, and famous for
Madonas; even so as to be nicknamed "Cartuccio delle Madonne" by Salvator
Rosa. Two letters of the cipher (CM) agree; what shall I do with regard to the
third? It is a small piece, and sadly blackened. It is about the size (though
not quite the shape) of the Bacchus over the parlour door, and has much such a
frame.

A person may amuse himself almost as cheaply as he pleases. I find no small
delight in rearing all sorts of poultry; geese, turkeys, pullets, ducks, etc. I
am also somewhat smitten with a blackbird which I have purchased: a very sine
one; brother by father, but not by mother, to the unfortunate bird you so
beautifully describe, a copy of which description you must not fail to send me;
-- but, as I said before, one may easily habituate one's self to cheap
amusements; that is, rural ones (for all town amusements are horridly
expensive); -- I would have you cultivate your garden; plant flowers, have a
bird or two in the hall (they will at least amuse your children); write now and
then a song; buy now and then a book; write now and then a letter to

Your most sincere friend, and affectionate servant, W. SHENSTONE.
P. S. I hope you have exausted all your spirit of criticism upon my verses,
that you may have none left to cavil as this letter; for I am ashamed to think,
that you, in particular, should receive the dullest I ever wrote in my life,
Make my compliments to Mrs. Jago. -- She can go a little abroad, you say. --
Tell her, I should be proud to show her The Leasows. Adieu!



LI. To Mr. --, on his Marriage.
This was written August 21, 1748; but not sent till the 28th. Dear Sir,
HOW little soever I am inclined to write at this time, I cannot bear that you
should censure me of unkindness in seeming to overlook, the late change in your
situation. It will, I hope, be esteemed superfluous in me to send you my most
cordial wishes that you may be happy; but it will, perhaps, be something more
significant to say, that I believe you will; building my opinion on the
knowledge I have long had of your own temper, and the account you give me of
the person's whom you have made choice of, to whom I desire you to pay my
sincere and most affectionate compliments.

I shall always be glad to find you praesentibus aequum, though I should always
be pleased when I saw you tentantem majora. I think you should neglect no
opportunity at this time of life to push your fortune so far as an elegant
competency, that you be not embarrassed with those kind of solicitudes toward
the evening of your day; Ne te semper inops agitet vexetque cupido,
Ne pavor, and rerum mediocriter utilium spes!
I would have you acquire, if possible, what the world calls, with some
propriety, an easy fortune; and what I interpret, such a fortune as allows of
some inaccuracy and inattention, that one may not be continually in suspense
about the laying out a shilling; -- this kind of advice may seem extremely
dogmatical in me; but, if it carries any haughty air, I will obviate it by
owning that I never acted as I say. I have lost my road to happiness, I
confess; and, instead of pursuing the way to the fine lawns, and venerable
oaks, which distinguish the region of it, I am got into the pitiful
parterre-garden of amusement, and view the nobler scenes at a distance. I think
I can see the road too that leads the better way, and can show it others; but I
have many miles to measure back before I can get into it myself, and no kind of
resolution to take a single step. My chief amusements at present are the same
they have long been, and lie scattered about my farm. The French have what they
call a parque ornee; I suppose, approaching about as near to a garden as the
park at Hagley. I give my place the title of a ferme ornee; though, if I had
money, I should hardly confine myself to such decorations as that name
requires. I have made great improvements; and the consequence is, that I long
to have you see them.

I have not heard whether Miss -- 's match proceeded. -- I suppose your
objections were grounded on the person's age and temper; and that they had the
less weight, as they supposed you acted indiscreetly yourself: I can say but
little on the occasion. You know -- better than I do: Only this I must add,
that I have so great an esteem for your sister, that it will be necessary to my
ease, that whoever marries her she should be happy.

I have little hopes that I shall now see you often in this country; though it
would be you, in all probability, as soon as any, that would take a journey of
fifty miles, To see the poorest of the sons of men. The truth is, my affairs
are miserably embroiled, by my own negligence, and the non-payment of tenants.
I believe, I shall be forced to seize on one next week for three years and a
half's rent, due last Lady Day; an affair to which I am greatly averse, but
through indolence and compassion. I hope, however, I shall be always able (as I
am sure I shall be desirous) to entertain a friend of a philosophical regimen,
such as you and Mr. Whistler; and that will be all I can do.

Hagley-park is considerably improved since you were here, and they have built
a castle by way of ruin on the highest part of it, which is just seen from my
wood; but by the removal of a tree or two (growing in a wood that joins to the
park, and which, fortunately enough, belongs to Mr. Dolman and me), I believe
it may be rendered a considerable object here.

I purpose to write to Mr. Whistler either this post or the next. The fears you
seemed in upon my account are very kind, but have no grounds. I am, dear Mr.
--, habitually and sincerely,

Your most affectionate W. SHENSTONE.
My humble service to your neighbors. -- Smith (whom you knew at Derby) will
publish a print of my grove in a small collection.



LII. To Mr. JAGO, with an Invitation to The LEASOWS.
Sept. 3, Saturday night, 1748. Dear Mr. JAGO,
I HARDLY know whether it will be prudent in me to own, that I wrote you a long
letter upon the receipt of your last, which I now have upon my table. I condemn
this habit in myself entirely, and should, I am sure, be very unhappy, if my
friends, by my example, should be induced to contract the same. The truth is, I
had not expressed myself in it to my mind, and it was full of blots and
blunders, and interlinings; yet, such as it was, it had wearied my attention,
and given me a disinclination to begin it a fresh. I am now impatient to remove
any scruple you may have concerning my grateful sense of all your favors, and
the invariable continuance of my affection and esteem -- I find by your last
obliging letter, that my machinations and devices are not entirely private. --
You knew of my draught of Hagley Castle about the bigness of a barley-corn; you
knew of our intended visit to Lady Luxborough's; and I must add, Mr. Thomas
Hall knew of my contrivance for the embellishment of Mr. Hardy's house. Nothing
is there hid that shall not be revealed. -- Our visit to Barrels is now over
and pad. -- Lady Luxborough has seen Hagley Castle in the original: -- and as
to my desire that my draught might be shown to no Christian soul, you surely
did but ill with it, when you showed that drawing to a Clergyman. However, you
may have acted up to my real meaning, if you have taken care not to show it to
any connoisseur. I meant chiefly to guard against any one that knows the rules,
in whose eyes, I am sure, it would not turn to my credit. -- Pray how do you
like the festoons dangling over the oval windows? -- It is the chief advantage
in repairing an old house, that one may deviate from the rules without any
extraordinary censure.

I will not trouble you now with many particulars. The intent of Tom's coming
is, to desire your company and Mrs. Jago's this week. -- I should be extremely
glad if your convenience would allow you to come on Monday or Tuesday; but, if
it is entirely impracticable, I would beseech you not to put off the visit
longer than the Monday following, for the leaves of my groves begin to fall a
great pace. I beg once more, you would let no small inconvenience prevent your
being here on Monday. -- As to my visit at Icheneton, you may depend upon it
soon after; and I hope you will not stand upon punctilio, when I mention my
inclination that you may all take a walk through my coppices before their
beauty is much impaired. Were I in a sprightly vein, I would aim at saying
something genteel by way of answer to Mrs. Jago's compliment. -- As it is, I
can only thank her for the substance, and applaud the politeness of it. -- I
postpone all other matters till I see you. I am, habitually and sincerely,

Your most affectionate friend, W. SHENSTONE.
I beg my compliments to Mr Hardy.


P. S. I am not accustomed, my dear friend, to send you a blank page; nor can I
be content to do so now.

I thank you very sensibly for the verses with which you honor me. I think
them good lines, and so do others that have seen them; but you will give me
leave, when I see you, to propose some little alteration. As to an epistle, it
would be executed with difficulty, and I would have it turn to your credit as
well as my own. But you have certainly of late acquired an case in writing; and
I am tempted to think, that what you write henceforth will be universally good.
Persons that have seen your elegies like " The Blackbirds" best, as it is most
assuredly the most correct: but I, who pretend to great penetration, can
foresee that "The Linnets" will be made to excel. -- More of this when I see
you. Poor Miss G --, J -- R -- says, is married: and poor Mr. Thomson, Mr. Pit
tells me, is dead. -- He was to have been at Hagley this week, and then I
should probably have seen him here -- As it is, I will erect an urn in Virgil's
Grove to his memory. -- I was really as much shocked to hear of his death, as
if I had known and loved him for a number of years: -- God knows, I lean on a
very few friends; and if they drop me, I become a wretched misanthrope.



LIII. To the same.
Sunday night, Sept. 11, 1748. Dear Mr. Jago,
I TAKE this opportunity of acknowledging the justice of your excuses. Mrs.
Jago's present circ^stances render her visit quite impracticable, and yours I
have the same kind of reason to dispense with; as I guess, that she could as
soon take a journey herself at this time, as bear that you should. -- But to
say I was not greatly mortified, would be doing myself the greatest injustice.
Disappointed I was, you may be sure, to hear excuses; even as much as Sir John
Falstaff, when Mr. Dombledon put him in mind of security, instead of sending
him two and thirty yards of satin to make him a short cloak. And on the whole,
I began to accuse you and Mrs. Jago of colloguing together, to fix your visit
at a time when you were well assured you should have an apology to send me
instead. Now, if I should press this accusation, pray how would you evade the
force of it? -- The next thing I am to speak to, is your verses. I have made
you my acknowledgments before; and as you are so good as to accept them, I will
not trouble you with additional professions, or repetitions of the past. I will
depend upon your good-sense for an excuse, if I only add what I think proper as
to any alteration; wherein I have a view to your credit, as my own. I confess,
it requires some nicety to inscribe such an elegy as The Gold-finches without
the danger you foresaw. But I think it may be done (and is pretty nearly) in
such manner as no man of taste will be tempted to ridicule it; and as for the
vulgar, of whatever rank they be, it is absolutely necessary many times to give
them up. Taste and tenderness are absolutely connected; and you may very
readily call to mind some charming things, that must excite the laughter of
your men of fire and banter, but are by no means thought the worse of by men of
true genius. I will only mention Andrew Marvel's Fawn in Dryden's Miscellanies.
I enclose the elegy with some few proposed alterations, so I will not risque
the silling my letter with criticism. I also enclose the other verses you sent
me, which I think good ones, and to stand in need of little alteration, beside
that of the inglorious name at the head of them; to which, notwithstanding, I
will never submit. Pray who is the young gentleman that translates your elegy
into Latin? -- The new dress will give you some amusement; and, if these lines
be the product of the genius of a boy of that age, he will in a year's time be
able to extend the same of your compositions. I shall then be glad to see the
Gold finches under his hand; though I have no extraordinary fondness for the
Latin poetry of a modern; at least, till your eldest son begins to translate
our madrigals.

I have not yet seen Mr. Thomson's Castle of Indolence. -- I waited for a
smaller edition; but am now too impatient not to send for it on Thursday next.
-- I am fully bent on raising a neat urn to him in my lower grove, if Mr.
Lyttelton does not inscribe one at Hagley before me. But I should be extremely
glad of your advice whereabouts to place it. -- You speak of my dwelling in the
Castle of Indolence, and I verily believe I do. There is something like
enchantment in my present inactivity; for, without any kind of let or
impediment to the correction of my trifles that I see, I am in no wise able to
make the leaft advances. I think within myself I could proceed if you were
here; and yet I have reason to believe, if you were here, we should only ramble
round the groves, and chat away the time; and perhaps that, upon the whole, is
of full as much importance. -- I do not know but I do myself some little
injustice here, for I have wrote out my levities, and my sonnets, good and bad,
with many ornaments from the pencil; and the next thing I do will be to
transcribe my elegies. The fault is, I take no pains to improve what I
transcribe, and, consequently, am only able to exhibit my nonsense in a fairer
dress. -- You must give me leave, ere it be long, to insert two or three lines
(I think in verse) before Mrs. Jago's flower-piece. -- I am sure, I am obliged
to her for a fruit I greatly love. -- It was not entirely ripe; but it was the
only one I have tasted since I was last in London. -- Yesterday dined here Lady
Luxborough, Mr. Outing and Mr. Hall, Lord Dudley, Miss Lea, Counselor Corbet
and Mr. Sanders, Mr. Perry, Mrs. Perry and Miss Dolman, and half a dozen
footmen beside my own servants and laborers; so you may guess we had no small
fracas. I now sit down amid solitude and silence, and can hear little else
beside the pendulum of my clock; -- yet my spirits are no way sunk, but afford
me just such a temperature of mind as inclines me to write to some familiar
friend: albeit I have a thousand things to talk of to you, which I do not care
to write. I hope to be able to spend a few days with Mr. Hardy, before his
melons are all gone; and yet I would not have him keep one a moment longer upon
my account. I desire he would accept of my compliments, as I trust he will. --
Franks at present run low with me; but I send you one, which you cannot use so
soon but I shall be able to send you others immediately. I wish I could send
you any thing more than the means of obliging,

Sir, Your most affectionate friend, W. S.

LIVE. To the same.
Sunday, Nov. 13. Dear Sir,
I MUST fairly own, that I have not sat down till now to return my
acknowledgments for your last most obliging favor; and yet I have been doing
so in imagination almost every day since I received it. I have only to desire
that you would not think me stupid; and then you must of course conclude me
highly delighted, to find the verses which had so greatly pleased me, made so
particularly interesting to me. In testimony hereof, I have caused these my
letters to be made patent, etc. Furthermore, I am glad to see you dissent from
some alterations I proposed, for which, generally speaking, I think I can see
your reasons. As to any little matter which I have to mention farther, I choose
to defer it till I wait on Mr. Hardy; which I purpose to do before this month
is out. It may possibly happen the beginning of the next week; but I dare not
lay such stress upon a future event, as to give you a commission to say so much
to him. Instead thereof please to make him my compliments, and tell him I talk
of coming very soon.

I borrowed Dodsley's Miscellany of Lady Luxborough, in which are many good
things. I long to be making a mark on the head of every copy (as I would do
were the books my own). Here a cipher; there an asterism of five points, and
there one of eight. -- If you, and Mr. W --, and Mr. G --, and I, were together
for a fortnight, to correct and revise, might not we make a miscellany of
originals that would sell? -- My fingers itch to be at it; -- but I fear it
cannot be. -- Thomson's poem amused me greatly. -- I think his plan has faults;
particularly, that he should have said nothing of the diseases attending
laziness in his first canto, but reserved them to strike us more affectingly in
the last; but, on the whole, who would have thought that Thomson could have so
well imitated a person remarkable for simplicity both of sentiment and phrase?

I study no connections in a letter; and so I proceed to tell you, that I have
got a machine to exhibit landscapes, etc. to advantage. It costs about fourteen
shillings, and I recommend one to you or Mr. Hardy. -- Smith's Views (with a
little coloring) appear ravishingly; -- but if you are not content with
amusement, and want fame (which differs about as much as fox-hunting from
hare-hunting), you must print. -- However, if you can acquiesce in a limited
reputation, to give you a proper weight at all your visiting-places (which I
think enough for all reasonable ends and purposes), take the following receipt.

A receipt to make FAME.
TAKE a shoemaker into your parlour (that is reputed a good workman), and bid
him procure a piece of red or blue Morocco leather; let him shape this into the
size of a quarter of a sheet of paper, or it may be something larger. Let him
double it in such a manner as to leave some part to wrap over; then stitch it
neatly at the ends, lining it either with silk or the best yellow leather he
can meet with. Then must you bespeak a silver clasp, which you may have gilded;
but be sure it be neatly chased, and properly annexed to the aforesaid Morocco
leather. Make a present of this to the prettiest girl you know, but filled with
half a dozen of your best compositions; take care that one be in praise of her
ingenuity. For modesty sake, desire her not to show them to any living soul;
but, at the same time, be careful that your clasp be splendid, and your
letter-case made according to the foregoing direction.

Adieu! seriously yours, W. S.

LV. To a Friend, disappointing him of a Visit.
June, 1749.
FIE on Mr. N --! he has disappointed me of the most seasonable visit that
heart could wish or desire. -- My flowers in blossom, my walks newly cleaned,
my neighbors invited, and I languishing for lack of your company! Mean time
you are going to dance attendance on a courtier. -- Would to God! he may
disappoint you, according to the usual practice of those gentlemen; -- I mean,
by giving you a far better living than you ever expected.

I have no sooner made that I am ready to recall that wish, in order to
substitute another in its place; which is, that you may rather squat yourself
down upon a fat goose living in Warwickshire, or one in Staffordshire, or
perhaps Worcestershire, of the same denomination. I do not mention Shropshire,
because I think I am more remote from the main body of that county than I am
from either of the others. But, nevertheless, by all means wait on Mr. N --;
show him all respect, yet so as not to lay out any of the profits of your
contingent living in a black velvet waistcoat and breeches to appear before
him. True merit needs naught of this. Besides, peradventure, you may not
receive the first quarter's income of it this half year. He will probably do
something for you one time or other; but you shall never go into Ireland, that
is certain, for less than a deanery; not for less than the deanery of St.
Patrick's, if you take my advice. Lower your hopes only to advance your
surprise; " grata supervenient quae non sperabimus." Come to me as you may. A
week is elapsed since you began to be detained; you may surely come over in a
fortnight now at farthest; -- I will be at home. -- However, write directly;
you know our letters are long upon their journey. -- I expected you the
beginning of every week, till I received your last letter impatiently.

For my part, I began to wean myself from all hopes and expectations whatever.
-- I feed my wild-ducks, and I water my carnations! Happy enough, if I could
extinguish my ambition quite, or indulge (what I hope I feel in an equal
degree) the desire of being something more beneficial in my sphere. -- Perhaps
some few other circumstances would want also to be adjusted.

I have just read Lord Bolingbroke's three letters, which I like as much as
most pieces of politics I ever read. I admire, especially, the spirit of the
style. I as much admire at the editor's unpopular preface. -- I know the family
hitherto seemed to make it a point to conceal Pope's affair; and now, the
editor, under Lord B's inspection, not only relates, but invites people to
think the worst of it. -- What collateral reasons my Lord may have for thinking
ill of Mr. Pope, I cannot say; but surely it is not political to lessen a
person's character that had done one so much honor.

I am, dear Sir, Your affectionate W. SHENSTONE.
I have this moment received a long letter from Lady Luxborough; and you are to
look on all I said concerning both Lord Bolingbroke's affair, and her
resentment, as premature. My Lady's daughter and son-in-law visit her next week.



LVI. To Mr. JAGO.
From The Leasows, as it appears on a rainy Evening, June, 1749. Dear Sir,
IT would probably be so long before you can receive this letter by the post,
that I cannot think of subjecting my thanks for your last, or my hopes of
seeing you soon, to such an uncertainty. -- I shall not now have it in my power
to meet you at Mr. Wren's immediately, so would lose no time in requesting your
company here next week, if you please. I hope Mrs. Jago also will accompany
you, and that you will set out the first day of the next week, even Monday;
that you may not leave me in less than six days time, under a pretense of
necessity. As to the verses you were so kind to convey, I will take occasion
when you come. -- To find out, like a friend,
Something to blame, and mickle to commend.
So I say no more at present on that head.

I love to read verses, but I write none. "Petit, nihil me sicut ante juvat
scribere!" -- I will not say none; for I wrote the following at breakfast
yesterday, and they are all I have wrote since I saw you. They are now in one
of the root-houses of Virgil's Grove, for the admonition of my good friends the
vulgar, of whom I have multitudes every Sunday evening, and who very
fortunately believe in fairies, and are no judges of poetry.

Here in cool grot, and mossy cell,
We tripping fawns and fairies dwell.
Though rarely seen by mortal eye,
Often as the moon, ascended high,
Darts through yon limes her quivering beam,
We frisk it near this crystal stream.
Then fear to spoil these sacred bowers;
Nor wound the shrubs, nor crop the flowers;
So may your path with sweets abound!
So may your couch with rest be crowned!
But ill-betide or nymph or swain,
Who dares these hallowed haunts profane.
OBERON. I suppose the rotund at Hagley is completed but I have not seen it
hitherto; neither do I often journey or visit any where, except when a shrub or
flower is upon the point of blossoming near my walks. -- I forget one visit I
lately made in my neighborhood, to a young clergyman of taste and ingenuity.
His name is Pixell; he plays finely upon the violin, and very well upon the
harpsichord: has set many things to music, some in the soft way, with which I
was much delighted. He is young, and has time to improve himself. He gave me an
opportunity of being acquainted with him by frequently visiting, and
introducing company, to my walks. -- I met him one morning with an Italian in
my grove, and our acquaintance has been growing ever since. -- He has a share
in an estate that is near me, and lives there at present; but I doubt will not
do so long; -- when you come, I will send for him. -- Have you read my Lord
Bolingbroke's Essays on Patriotism, etc.? and have you read Merope? and do you
take in the Magazin des Londres? and pray how does your garden flourish? I
warrant, you do not yet know the difference betwixt a ranunculus and an
anemone. -- God help ye! -- Come to me, and be informed of the nature of all
plants, "from the cedar on Mount Lebanon to the hyssop that springs out of
the wall." -- Pray do not fail to decorate your new garden, whence you may
transplant all kinds of flowers into your verses. If by chance you make a visit
at I -- fifty years hence, from some distant part of England, shall you forget
this little angle where you used to muse and sing?

En unquam, etc.
Post aliquot, tua regna videns mirabere, aristas.
I expect by the return of Tom to receive a trifle that will amuse you. It is a
gold seal of Vida's head, given by Virtue to a relation of mine, who published
Vida, and introduced Virtue into business. -- Perhaps you remember Mr. Triftram
of Hampton, and the day we spent there from school; it was his.

I am, very cordially, Yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LVII. To the same.
1749. Dear Sir,
IT is now Sunday evening, and I have been exhibiting myself in my walks to no
less than a hundred and fifty people, and that with no less state and vanity
than a Turk in his seraglio. -- I have some hopes of seeing you this week; but
if these should happen to be frustrated, I shall find them revive with double
ardour and vivacity the next. Did you tell me of a treatise that your Mr.
Millar had, where the author endeavors to vindicate and establish Gothic
architecture? and does not the same man explain it also by draughts on copper
plates? That very book, or rather the title, and the author's name, I want. --
I shall never, I believe, be entirely partial to Goths or Vandals either; but I
think, by the assistance of some such treatise, I could sketch out some
charming Gothic temples and Gothic benches for garden seats. -- I do also
esteem it extremely ridiculous to permit another person to design for you, when
by sketching out your own plans you appropriate the merit of all you build, and
feel a double pleasure from any praises which it receives. -- I had here last
Wednesday Dean Lyttelton, Mr. William Lyttelton, Commodore West, Miss Lyttelton
and Miss West. They drank tea, and went round my walks, where they seemed
astonished they had been so long ignorant of the beauties of the place; said,
in general, every thing that was complaisant or friendly; and left me highly
delighted with their visit, and with room to hope for many more. Mean time, why
do not you come? I do say you are not Pylades. -- What! you think, because you
have an agreeable wife, and five fine children, that you must employ all your
time in caressing them at home, or laying schemes for their emolument abroad?
Is this public spirit? is this virtue? or, if it be virtue, do thou think,
because thou art vartuous, there must be no cakes and ale? is it not your duty
to partake of them with a friend sometimes; easing and relieving him under what
Boileau calls, Le penible fardeau de n'avoir rien a fair. and what Pope (
stealing from the former) denominates The pains and penalties of idleness.

Pray come the first day of the week, and let Mr. Fancourt accompany you. -- I
have not much to add by way of news. The Duke of Somerset is going to lay out
thirty thousand pounds upon Northumberland-house; nine houses to be purchased
and pulled down on the other side the Strand for stables; the Strand there to
be widened: I cannot tell you half; but one thing more I will, which is, that
there will be a chapel on one side of the quadrangle, with a Gothic wainscot
and cieling, and painted glass; and in it a Dutch stove, contrived so as to
look like a tomb with an urn upon it.

What need I write all this? am I not to see you in a few days? -- Not a word
more positively; having what may serve to assure you that I am, dear Sir,

Inviolably yours, W. SHENSTONE.
The Leasows, July 9, 1749.
LVIII. To the same.
The Leasows, March 15, 1749-50. Dear Sir,
THOUGH I have not hitherto troubled you with a letter, I have not been void
either of inquiry or information, concerning the state of your affairs, and of
Mr. Hardy's health. Indeed it is now several weeks since I collected some
particulars from your brother, and I am now impatient for further intelligence.
As to the circumstances of our friendly reception at Wroxall, Mr. John Jago has
probably enough acquainted you with them. He would, however, seduce me to give
you a distinct account; being assured, as he says, that Mr. Wren's behavior
must afford a good subject for drollery. I do not know how far this would be
proper; but I think, when I write again to my friend Wren, to give him a sketch
of his own character, just as it appeared to us during the time of our visit.
Perhaps it may avail a little. Amidst his violent passion for gardening, if he
would but prune away some wild excrescences from one or two branches of his
character, he might bring himself to bear good fruit. He should weed his mind a
little; where there has sprung up a most luxuriant crop of puns, that threaten
to choke all its wholesome productions. "Spinas animo fortius quam agro
evellat." He has good sense and goodnature; pity he should disguise them. --
Not but that it is better to have the substance alone than the forms alone, and
so I conclude. Since I came home, I have done little else than plant bushes,
hazel hawthorn, crabtree, elder, etc. together with some flowering shrubs that
I have had given me, and some that I have purchased to the amount of twenty
shillings. I think nothing remarkable has occurred; only, one miserable
tempestuous day, I had my Lord Stamford, who called to see my walks. My Lord
promised to come again in the summer, and invited me more than once to Enville.
By the way, he is now building a Gothic greenhouse by Mr. Miller's direction,
and intends to build castles, and God-knows-what. By all accounts, the place is
well worth seeing when you come in to the country, which I hope you will not
fail to do this spring. Pray do not you embroil me with Mr. Miller, in regard
to any observations I made in his walks. Remember there were a great many
things with which I was highly delighted; and forget that there were a few also
which I seemed less to admire. Indeed, I thought it idle to regulate my
expressions, amongst friends only, by the same rules which I ought to observe
in mixed company. I say ought, for he has been exceedingly favorable to me in
his representation of the Leasows. -- I hope to see Mr. Fancourt with you, when
you come this spring; and why not your brother? he can spend half a week every
now and then at Wroxal.

I have nothing to insert or enclose in this letter that can render it at all
agreeable. -- I cannot write, I cannot think. I can just muster up attention
enough to give orders to my workmen; I saunter about my grounds, take snuff,
and read Clarissa. This last part of my employment threatens to grow extremely
tedious: not but the author is a man of genius and nice observation; but he
might be less prolix. I will send you "The Life of Socrates" when I can get it
home from Barrels. I wish both your circumstances and mine would allow of an
utter inattention to them; and then, I believe, our natural indolence would be
a kind of match for our ambition. I shall probably enlarge my acquaintance this
year; but what does it? the circle of my friends with whom I can be easy, and
amused much, will continue small as ever. I could dwell a good deal upon this
subject; but I have only room to desire you would give me your opinion how I
should inscribe my urn to Mr. Somerville. "Author of the Chase" cannot be
tolerably expressed in Latin without a circumlocution. I aim at brevity, and
would therefore omit it. Pray read over the specimens I have thrown together,
and oblige me with a speedy answer, if it extend to nothing else besides yours
and Mrs. Jago's health, which I ought at this time more particularly to enquire
after. I am,

Your most affectionate, and faithful friend, W. SHENSTONE.

LIX. To the same.
June 11, 1750. Dear Sir,
I ACKNOWLEDGE myself obliged to you for procuring me the pictures. I received
them both very safe, as I have a pretty strong assurance I shall do most
articles of which my servant Tom has the care. -- He has punctuality and
management to alone for his imperfections. He brought me these paper-sculled
busts from Wroxall entirely unhurt, contrary to the expectation of all that saw
them; after which, he might undertake for almost any thing. -- The portrait is
undoubtedly a good one. I showed it to Mr. Smart (who is a painter himself,
though a clergyman), and he allowed as much; added also, that it had something
of Sir Godfrey Kneller, as well as of Sir Peter Lely. -- The flower-piece is
very good, so far as relates to the flowers; the dog and parrot abominable, and
the grapes very exceptionable. I never consider the two flower-pieces at
Icheneton with attention enough to cause a preference; having never any
thoughts that either would fall to my share. I shall add nothing with regard to
your choice; but that I sincerely hope yours is the better piece. I never heard
of Casteels, I own; nor can I find his name in any of my accounts of the
painters, though they take in pretty modern ones: but I can say this for your
comfort, that if he excelled in any thing, it was probably in flowers; for I
see his name at the bottom of those flower-pieces that I have in water colors,
as the designer of them; and I think the designs are good. Though I could wish
neither the Cupid nor the fruit-piece had escaped us, yet is there no blame to
be laid at your door; at least supposing that you are endowed with nothing more
than rational conjecture, and that you are not gifted with prophecy.

And now, having spoken, I think, to most parts of your letter, I proceed to
say a word or two in the way of appendix. First then, after five or six weeks
work of masons and carpenters, I plainly discover that my house is an
unfinishable thing; -- and yet, I persuade myself, there will never be wanting
a room in it, where you may spend an agreeable day with your undoubted friend.
-- Did I ever tell you how unseasonably the three fiddles struck up in my grove
about an hour after you left me; and how a set of ten bells was heard from my
wood the evening after? It might have passed for the harmony of some aerial
spirit, who was a well-wisher to us poor mortals; but that I think, had it been
so, it would have been addressed to the better sort, and of consequence have
been heard whilst you were here. This by way of introduction to what I am going
to tell you. Mr. Pixell has made an agreement with his club at Birmingham, to
give me a day's music in some part of my walks. The time is not yet fixed: but,
if you were an idle man, and could be brought over at a day or two's notice, I
would give it you, and be in hopes I could entertain you very agreeably.

You cannot think how much you gratified my vanity when you were here, by
saying that if this place were yours, you thought you should be less able to
keep within the bounds of aeconomy than myself. -- God knows, it is pain and
grief to me to observe her rules at all; and rigidly I never can. -- How is it
possible to possess improveable scenes, and not wish to improve them? and how
is it possible, with economy, to be at the expense of improving them upon my
fortune? To be continually in fear of excess in perfecting every trifling
design, how irksome! to be restrained from attempting any, how vexatious! so
that I never can enjoy my situation -- that is certain. -- Economy, that
invidious old matron! on occasion of ever frivolous expense, makes such a
hellish squalling, that the murmur of a cascade is utterly lost to me. -- Often
do I cry out with Cowley, O rivers! brooks! when, when in you, shall I
Myself, eased of un-peaceful thought, espy!
O woods and groves! when, when shall I be made
The happy tenant of your shade!


Paper fails: abruptly therefore, but sincerely and affectionately

I am, dear Sir, Yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LX. To C -- W --, Esquire
The Leasows, Sept. 9, 1750. Dear Sir,
PRAY, is laziness an excuse for not writing? Tell me. -- However, if it be so,
I am afraid I shall want an excuse for laziness, like the philosopher, who,
supposing the world might rest upon a tortoise's back, found himself no less
embarrassed for a pedestal to support his tortoise. I have indeed been pretty
busy at home, in raising a pool-dam, and have interchanged a few visits with
such of my acquaintance as live within three miles. -- What then? -- I
abominate all excuses that are grounded upon the business or amusements of an
idle man. -- As if such a person's time was so wholly filled up, that he could
not find half an hour to write a line to his friend. It is best to acknowledge
laziness at first, and that there are particular intervals, when one is much
less disposed to write even a sew lines, than at others. And then, as to
laziness, one has nothing to do but to plead human frailty; which, if a person
has not too many frailties besides, may perhaps be indulged him. However,
"Veniam petimusque, damusque," will not fail to weigh with every good-natured
man. The chief dealing I have with Harris the Jew is, for the intelligence
which he brings me concerning you and Mrs. W --; but it seldom amounts to much
more than that you are well, and in your garden.

He is an Ebrew Jew, or he would tell me you had purchased a couple of genteel
horses, or a chaise and pair, and were coming over to The Leasows to spend a
week with me.

Nevertheless, I hope to see you soon; but en passant I assure you, I shall go
in about a month to Mr. Jago's, and from thence to Mr. Miller's; who, I believe
I told you, was here, with Mr. Lyttelton, Lady Aylesbury, Colonel Conway, etc.
I think I never answered your query concerning Colonel Lyttelton. -- He is the
same person that you remember, and your prophecy concerning him has been
literally accomplished. He is a man of courage, genius, generosity, and
politeness; has been fortunate in the world; was made a Colonel at about six
and twenty; distinguished himself in several campaigns; married the Duchess of
Bridgewater; and had the other day about sixteen thousand pounds lest him by
Colonel Jefferies, a very distant relation. He has a seat, and speaks in the
House of Commons, has bought a town and country house; the latter of which he
is ornamenting in the modern way. His Duchess the most unceremonious
even-tempered woman that lives. -- So enjoy the spirit of prophecy, and exert
it again. -- It needs little more than good sense. -- Which of the historians
is it, that foretold in his history a very remarkable series of events, by dint
of this alone, and which were all accomplished? Let me know what you are doing
now. Have you repaired the farm-house you talked of? -- and have you remembered
to make the man a couple of good large niches in his chimney corner, where he,
and his family, may spend a more comfortable evening than was ever spent by any
first minister in Christendom; -- perhaps also converse more to the purpose.
You tell me nothing of your Mr. Jago, Seignior Benedict, the new married man.
Tell him to leave his wife and family for a day or two, saddle his mule, and
come to The Leasows. -- Tell him, all pleasures are heightened by a little
discontinuance. -- Tell him, did I say? how can you for shame advise him so
contrarily to your own practice?

Believe me, dear Sir, Very faithfully yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LXI. To C -- W --, Esquire
The Leasows, Nov. 2, 1750 Dear Sir,
IT never can be that I owe you for three letters; as to two, I will agree with
you; one that I received together with my books, and the other soon after; but
that I am indebted for more than these -- Credat Judaeus Apella,
Non ego.
Even that same "Judaeus Apella," who affords me this very opportunity of
sending my compliments to you and Mrs. W --, and of assuring you, that if I had
not proposed to have seen you, I had wrote to you long ago.

Master Harris talks very respectfully of your garden; and we have no dispute,
save only in one point, He says, that you labor very hard in your vocation;
whereas, I am not willing to allow that all the work you ever did, or will do
in it, is worth a single bunch of radishes. However, I dare not contradict him
too much, because he waits for my letter.

How happy are you, that can hold up your spade, and cry, "Avaunt Satan!" when
a toyman offers you his deceitful vanities! Do not you rejoice inwardly, and
pride yourself greatly in your own philosophy? 'Twas thus --
The wise Athenian crossed a glittering fair:
Unmoved by tongues and sights he walked the place,
Through tape, tags, tinsel, gimp, perfume, and lace.
Then bends from Mars's Hill his awful eyes,
And, "What a world I never want!" he cries.
PARNEL. Mean time, do not despise others that can find any needful amusement
in what, I think, Bunyan very aptly calls Vanity fair. I have been at it many
times this season, and I have bought many kinds of merchandise there. It is a
part of philosopy, to adapt one's passions to one's way of life; and the
solitary, unsocial sphere in which I move makes me think it happy that I can
retain a relish for such trifles as I can draw into it. Mean time, I dare not
reason too much upon this head. Reason, like the famous concave mirror at
Paris, would in two minutes, vitrify all the Jew's pack: I mean, that it would
immediately destroy all the form, color, and beauty, of every thing that is
not merely useful. -- But I ramble too far, and you do not want such
speculations. My intent, when I sat down, was to tell you, that I shall
probably see you very soon, and certainly remain in the mean time, and at all
times, Sir,

Your obliged, and very faithful servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LXII. To a Friend, on various Subjects.
1750. Dear Mr. --,
WITH the utmost gratitude for the observations which you sent me, and with the
highest opinion of their propriety in general, do I sit down to answer your
obliging letter. You will not take it amiss, I know, if I scrible broken hints,
and trace out little sketches of my mind, just as I should go near to explain
it if I were upon the spot, as often as I think of you, which I beg leave to
assure you happens many times in a day. They say, "A word to the wise is
enough;" a word, therefore, to a friend of understanding may be supposed to be
something more than enough, because it is probable he is acquainted with three
parts of one's mind before. -- The censure you have passed upon Milton's
Lycidas, so far as it regards the meter which he has chosen, is unexceptionably
just; and one would imagine, if that argument concerning the distance of the
rhimes were pressed home in a public essay, it should be sufficient to
extirpate that kind of verse for ever. As to my opinion concerning the choice
of English meter I dare not touch upon the subject, and I will give you my
reason: I began upon it in a letter which I intended for you about a month ago;
and I soon found that I had filled a sheet of paper with my dissertation, and
left no room for other things which I had more mind to communicate. Beside, I
sound it so blotted that I did not choose to send it; and as the subject is so
extremely copious, I shall decline it entirely, till talking may prove as
effectual as writing. -- As to your advice, with regard to my publications, I
believe it to be just, and shall, in all probability, pursue it. -- I am
afraid, by your account, that Dodsley has published my name to the
School-mistress. I was a good deal displeased at his publishing that poem
without my knowledge, when he had so many opportunities of giving me some
previous information; but, as he would probably disregard my resentment, I
chose to stifle it, and wrote to him directly upon the receipt of yours, that I
would be glad to furnish him with an improved copy of the School mistress, etc.
for his second edition. He accepts it with some complaisance, desires it soon;
and I am at a fault to have the opinion of my friends, what alterations or
additions it will be proper to insert. I have scribled a copy, which I send
this day to Mr. Graves and Mr. Whistler; but I am greatly fearful I shall not
receive their criticisms time enough, and I shall have the same longing for
yours. A journey to Whitchurch, which I have long proposed, might unite all
these advantages; and I heartily wish I may be able to effect it without
inconvenience. If I go thither, I call on you.

I am, ever and entirely yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LXIII. To the same.
The Leasows, March 28, 1751. Dear Sir,
WHAT a stupid fool was I, to show you those letters of my friend Graves,
wherein he declares himself so freely against a regular correspondence! see the
effects of it! You have taken immediate advantage of his example, and I must
never more expect an answer to any letter that I send you, in less than half a
century. I wrote to you after I came home, to thank you for all your kindness
at I --, etc. but not a syllable have I been able to receive from you, or a
word that I could hear concerning you. I could, however, very easily convince
you, that Mr. Graves (your precedent) is not altogether so hardened an offender
as you may imagine. His last letter is a very affectionate recantation. I
enclose that part of it which regards Mr. F --.

What a number of schemes are irreparably broken by the sudden death of the
Prince of Wales! Yours, my good friend, which seems to be destroyed amongst the
rest, has, I think, of late given you no solicitude. Your interest in Mr. N --
will remain the same, I suppose; and if he would but serve you nearer home, I
will have no sort of quarrel with him that he did not transplant you into
Cornwall. -- It is at least some gratification to a person's self love, when
one finds the more ambitious hopes of more aspiring people as liable to be
suddenly extinguished as one's own. However, the death of the Prince gave me a
good deal of concern, though it no way affected my particular interest, as he
had all the humane, affable, and generous qualities, which could recommend him
to one's affection.

Mr. Graves has sent me two copies of verses. One on Medals, to Mr. Walker; and
the other, on the late Memoirs of the London Heroines, Lady V --, Mrs.
Pilkington, and Mrs. Phillips. Both good in their way, which you shall see when
you come over.

Have you seen the first books of the Scribleriad, by Mr Cambridge? -- The
Verses written in a Country Churchyard? -- Mr. W. Whitehead's Ode to the Nymph
of Bristol Spring? -- or, what have you seen? -- You live infinitely more in
the world than I do; who hear nothing, see nothing, do nothing, and am nothing.
Remedy this unhappiness, by sending me somewhat that may rouse my attention. --
I must except what I hear from my Lady Luxborough, who indulges me now and then
with a letter in French.

If you should think this letter more than usually dull, you must know, that,
since I saw you, I have been generally dispirited; till about a fortnight ago I
found some nervous disorders that I greatly disliked, and upon examination was
told I had a nervous fever. For this I have been taking saline draughts and
bolus's, and hope I am something better; though I am far from well. I would not
indeed have written to you at this time, but I chose not to defer sending the
enclosed postscript. -- You, who have shared many of my happiest hours, will
excuse the produce of a more than ordinary dull one.

Mrs. Arnold comes up to enquire after my health, and wishes I may get better,
that I may stir out and see the pretty creatures in the barn. It seems, she has
a cow or two that have calved since I kept my room.

Why should I prolong a letter that has no kind of chance to afford you any
amusement? Make my compliments to Mrs. --, and believe me to be ever most
affectionately

Yours, W. SHENSTONE.
I have just taken and signed a lease for life of the terras beyond my wood,
for which I am to pay annually the sum of one shilling. -- Am not I man of
great worldly importance, to purchase ground and take leases thus? -- What
matters it whether the articles that secure the premises to me, would also
cover them or not?

My service to Mr. F -- t; -- why will he not come and spend a week with me? --
I think you cannot both be absent at a time.



LXIV. To Mr. GRAVES.
The Leasows, Feb, 16, 1750-1. Dear Mr. Graves,
SINCE I received your letter, I have been a week at W --. I believe I may have
told you, that I never was fond of that place. There is too much trivial
elegance, too much punctilio for me; and perhaps, as you express it, too much
speculation. But I was fearful I might entirely lose Mr. Whistler's
acquaintance, if I did not make an effort once in five years to return his
visit. Besides, I should have had no hopes of seeing him at The Leasows
hereafter; and I am extremely desirous of seeing both him and you here, having
made many alterations which I do not undertake but with an eye to the
approbation of my more generous friends; but he seems, to my great surprise, to
renounce the thing called taste in buildings, gardens, etc. is grown weary of
his own little embellishments at W --, and longs to settle in London for the
greater part of his time. This, I believe, he would put in execution
immediately; but that he thinks it might give some uneasiness to his mother, if
he should quit the house that she with so much difficulty obtained for him. I
too am sick of the word taste; but I think the thing itself the only proper
ambition, and the specific pleasure of all who have any share in the faculty of
imagination. I need not mention my reasons; you will soon conceive them. And,
however the case be, there is one branch of it which so totally engrosses the
persons with whom I principally converse, that I was astonished to hear him
speak even with indifference concerning the reigning taste for rural
decorations. I could ill forbear telling Mr. Whistler, that he was now
literally a beau in a band-box; but the freedom might have given more offense
than the joke was worth. He has improved the place extremely; but I do not like
his colonnades. You know, nothing of that kind is tolerable, unless regularly
executed in stone: that is one thing. Another is, that colonnades are ornaments
which will not bear to be very diminutive. Mr. -- (whose house only I saw) has
been at the expense of a large cornice round it, in most elaborate brick-work;
but with regard to his stucco-work within doors, he is quite extravagant. -- I
mention these things upon a supposition that you may like to hear any thing
that regards the place; but indeed they are so mighty trifling, that I ought to
doubt my supposition. I supped with Mr. P -- 's family once at Mr. W -- 's, and
all was mighty well; only I happen to have a violent aversion to card-playing,
and at W -- I think they do nothing else. So that, on account of my ignorance
at quadrille, or any creditable game, I was forced to lose my money, and two
evenings out of my seven, at Pope Joan with Mr. P -- 's children. Mr. W --, to
make me amends, invited me to breakfast, and showed me your verses. I assure
you, you have no occasion for a better advocate than Mr. W --; whether with
regard to his judgment, or his zeal in behalf of the subject, the verses or
the poet. I would fain have obtained a copy; but he did not care to give one
without your commission. I hope you will oblige me so far. I like them very
much; the subject is genteel, and the verses easy and elegant. We agreed upon
one or two different readings; and one stanza that concerns cards should, I
think, be corrected. Not that I would have you less severe upon cards neither;
I was even glad to find, that you g^ve them so little quarter. I sometimes
thought that Mr. W -- 's seeming fondness for them was a kind of contre-caeur.
-- Be that as it will, his objection to the stanza, as well as mine, was solely
founded on the versification, (...) the sentiment. I liked his Latin verses;
but they do not interfere with yours. Send me a copy, and confine my use of it
by what limitations you please. My reigning toy at present is a pocketbook;
and I glory as much in furnishing it with the verses of my acquaintance, as
others would with bank-bills. I did not know when I went to W --, but I might
have heard Mrs. G -- accused of certain questions touching their law (I mean of
forms and ceremonies); but I did not. On the contrary, I had the satisfaction
of hearing her person, her temper, and her understanding, much commended; but
this I did not want. The delicacy of your taste, is equal with me to a thousand
commendations. Mrs. W -- is really so much altered by her indisposition, that I
did not know her. She talks of going to Bath this season. -- I talked of it
too, and wish it of all earthly things. You must know, I could not have come to
Claverton instead of going to W --, as I did not determine on the expedition at
home; but at a friend's house, where I was betwixt twenty and thirty miles on
my way thither. Besides, I would allow myself more time when I turn my face
toward Bath, than I could this winter. Your invitation, as it is very
obliging, so it has many concurring circumstances to recommend it at this time.
I want to recover my health, which must be recovered by Bath, or nothing I want
to have you read some trifles of mine, which must be ratified by you, or no
one; but principally, and above all, do I long to see you, my old friend, and
Mrs. G --, whom I expect you should render my new one. -- I am obliged for your
charitable endeavors to support my spirits. Your company would do it
effectually, but scarce any thing less, in winter. Solitary life, limited
circumstances, a phlegmatic habit, and disagreeable events, have given me a
melancholy turn, that is hardly dissipated by the most serene sky; but in a
north-east wind, is quite intolerable. After a long state of this kind, upon
every access of amusement, one is apt to think it is not right to be happy;
that it is one of Wollaston's implicit lies; a treating things contrary to what
they deserve. -- Your situation at Claverton is admired by most people; and, if
you could connect some little matter in the neighborhood, would be as surely
envied.

It is now high time to release you. -- This is not a letter, but an olio. I
desire my compliments to Mrs. G --, and am affectionately and invariably.

Yours, W. SHENSTONE.
As I must now use a frank, I will send you a few inscriptions: your
imagination will supply the scenery, on which, what merit they may have,
depends. There were different readings in the first copy, of which I beg your
opinion. Stanza the first. At least this calm sequestered shade
Ambition never dares invade
No, etc.
But shuns, etc.
Stanza the second. Hither the plaintive halcyon hies,
Avoiding all the race that flies.
My design was only to convey some pleasing ideas of things, which, though
proper to the place, a person might not chance to see there once in twenty
times. Mr. Lyttelton and Lady Alyesbury necessitated me to give them copies,
though they probably did it out of complaisance only: I gave them in the manner
I send them you. I hope you have not entirely dropped your love for rural scenes,
of which you were once so fond. I will allow your taste for medals to
preponderate. -- I beg, dear Sir, you would neglect no opportunity of calling
on me. -- I will come to Claverton when I can.



LXV. To a Friend.
The Leasows, Sept, 17, 1757. Dear Mr. G --,
I AM very sensibly obliged to you for the diligence and expedition which you
have shown in answering my late request: I cannot feel the very tenderness of
friendship to be at all abated in me by our long separation; nor will it at any
time be possible I should, so long as I receive such testimonies of your usual
kindness and ingenuity. -- I have no sort of exceptions to make against the
province in which you were engaged at Cheltenham, nor the light in which you
appeared. What you lost in any ones opinion of your independency, you would
gain in their idea of your merit, genius and learning; and then you had all
those advantages par dessu. -- As to the compliments that were paid to Mrs. G
--, you have something of the same sort of reason to be pleased with them, that
I have to be pleased with those that are given to my place; which I consider as
naturally possessed of many beauties, each of them brought to light, and
perfected through my own discernment, care and cultivation. And then, your
pleasure ought to be so much greater than mine, as you have a nobler subject to
enjoy. -- Mrs. G -- has too much sense to object against the freedom of this
similitude.

I cannot help adding a few strokes to your picture of Mrs. --. I think her an
extremely superficial female-pedant; for after an interval of many years since
I first conversed with her at Mr. -- 's I found her conversation turn solely
upon the same topics, definitions and quotations. I believe, I could easily
enough have recommended myself to a greater degree of her favor; but her
vanity and affectations are beyond what I could bear. Your account of -- is
very picturesque, and agreeable to the idea I always had of him; but I believe
that idea was perfected by wh^ observations I made when I had some of his
company at London. There was something accountable enough to me in their
burlesquing Mr. L -- 's monody. He is, you know, engaged in a party, and his
poem (though an extraordinary fine composition) was too tender for the public
ear. It should have been printed privately, and a number of copies dispersed
only among their friends and acquaintances; -- but even so, it would have been
republished; and it was too good to suppress. I wish the burlesquers of such
ingenuous profusions could be punished, consistently with English liberty.
"Where were ye, Muses, etc." is imitated from Milton, and taken from Milton
from Theocritus. I write Greek wretchedly; but you will remember the passage,
(...)


I heard, once before, it was burlesqued under the title of "An Elegy on the
Death of a favorite Cat;" but the burlesque will die, and the poem will
survive. -- You tell me, "The Author of Peregrine Pickle says, if you will
flatter Mr. Lyttelton well, he will at least make you a Middlesex Justice;" and
it happened oddly that, whilst I was reading your letter, a neighbor told me,
I was put in the commission of the peace. I have never received a single line
from Mr. Whistler, and I believe my journey to W -- has given the final blow to
our friendship. Pray was not Mr. Blandy some relation of theirs, or only their
attorney? The affair is uncommonly shocking; and I fancy the genuine accounts
that Mr. W -- sends you, will be curious anecdotes at Bath -- I suppose you
have painted your room with oil colors, and made it really handsome. -- I drew
out a festoon and a medal some time ago, for a panel over Mr. P -- 's chimney;
but they knew not what to make of the medal, and had only the festoon executed
in stone color, by a common painter; -- yours is better, and in character. --
I am a degree more frugal than you; for I only use quick lime, and either blue
or yellow ^and to take away the objection which I have to whited walls.

I paid a visit to Mr. Lyttelton, the Dean, etc. since he came down; but had
little of their company, for they thought Sir Thomas was dying: however, by
unparalleled strength of constitution, he lingered in violent pain till last
Saturday, when he died, very much lamented. He had good natural parts, well
improved by reading modern writers, and by the knowledge of the world;
extremely, prudent, considerate, humane, polite and charitable. -- I have
jumbled his more obvious qualities together, that you may not think I am
usurping the province of a news-man. Sir George will lose no time in building a
new house, or doing what is more than equivalent to the old one.

I want no temptation to come immediately to C --. This is a melancholy season
with me always; whether it be owing to the scenes I see, or to the effect of
hazy skies upon an ill-perspiring skin. -- I can say no more at present, than
that I most ardently desire to see you, and desire my humble service to Mrs. G
--. I have a chalybeat spring in the middle of my grotto: what think you of
this inscription? FONS FERRVGINEVS Is it antique?

I am, dear Mr. G --, Your most affectionate W. SHENSTONE.

LXVI. To Mr. GRAVES, on the Death of Mr. SHENSTONE's Brother.
The Leasows, Feb. 14, 1752. Dear Mr. Graves,
YOU will be amazed at my long silence; and it might reasonably excite some
disgust if my days had passed of late in the manner they used to do: but I am
not the man I was; perhaps I never shall be. Alas! my dearest friend! I have
lost my only brother! and, since the fatal close of November, I have had
neither peace nor respite from agonizing thoughts!

You, I think, have seen my brother; but perhaps had no opportunity of
distinguishing him from the groupe of others, whom we call good-natured men.
This part of his character was so visible in his countenance, that he was
generally beloved at sight; I, who must be allowed to know him, do assure you,
that his understanding was no way inferior to his benevolence. He had not only
a sound judgment, but a lively wit and genuine humor. As these were many
times eclipsed by his native bashfulness, so his benevolence only suffered by
being shown to an excess. I here mean his giving too indiscriminately into
those jovial meetings of company, where the warmth of a social temper is
discovered with less reserve; but the virtues of his head and heart would soon
have shone without alloy. The foibles of his youth were wearing off; and his
affection for me and regard to my advice, with his own good sense, would soon
have rendered him all that I could have wished in a successor. I never in my
life knew a person more sincere in the expression of love or dislike. But it
was the former that suited the propensity of his heart; the latter was as
transient as the starts of passion that occasioned it. In short, with much true
genius and real fortitude, he was, according to the English acceptance, "a
true honest man;" and I think I may also add, a truly English character; but
"habeo, dixi? immo habui fratrem and amicum, Chreme!" All this have I lost in
him. He is now in regard to this world no more than a mere idea. And this idea,
therefore, though deeply tinged with melancholy, I must, and surely ought to,
cherish and preserve.

I believe I wrote you some account of his illness last spring; from which, to
all appearance, he was tolerably well recovered. He took the air, and visited
about with me, during the warmer months of summer; but my pleasure was of short
duration. "Haesit lateri lethalis arundo!" The peripneumony under which he
labored in the spring had terminated in an adhesion of the lungs to the
pleura, so that he could never lie but on his right side; and this, as the
weather grew colder, occasioned an obstruction that could never be surmounted.

Though my reason forewarned me of the event, I was not the more prepared for
it. -- Let me not dwell upon it --.It is altogether insupportable in every
respect: and my imagination seems more assiduous in educing pain from this
occasion, than I ever yet found it in administering to my pleasure. -- This
hurts me to no purpose. -- I know it; and yet, when I have avocated my
thoughts, and fixed them for a while upon common amusements, I suffer the same
sort of consciousness as if I were guilty of a crime. Believe me, this has been
the most sensible affliction I ever felt in my life; and you, who know my
anxiety when I had far less reason to complain, will more easily conceive it
now, than I am able to describe it.

I cannot pretend to fill up my paper with my usual subjects. -- I should thank
you for your remarks upon my poetry; but I despise poetry: and I might tell you
of all my little rural improvements; but I hate them. -- What can I now expect
from my solitary rambles through them, but a series of melancholy reflections
and irksome anticipations? -- Even the pleasure I should take in in showing
them to you, the greatest they can afford me, must be now greatly inferior to
what it might formerly have been.

How have I prostituted my sorrow on occasions that little concerned me! I am
ashamed to think of that idle "Elegy upon Autumn." when I have so much more
important cause to hate and to condemn it now; but the glare and gaiety of the
Spring is what I principally dread; when I shall find all things restored but
my poor brother, and something like those lines of Milton will run for ever in
my thoughts: Thus, with the year,
Seasons return; but not to me returns
A brother's cordial smile, at eve or morn.
I shall then seem to wake from amusements, company; every sort of inebriation
with which I have been endeavoring to lull my grief asleep, as from a dream;
and I shall feel as if I were, that instant, despoiled of all I have chiefly
valued for thirty years together; of all my present happiness, and all my
future prospects. The melody of birds, which he no more must hear; the cheerful
beams of the sun, of which he no more must partake; every wonted pleasure will
produce that sort of pain to which my temper is most obnoxious. Do not consider
this as poetry. -- Poetry on such occasions is no more than literal truth. In
the present case it is less; for half the tenderness I feel is altogether
shapeless and inexpressible.

After all, the wisdom of the world may perhaps esteem me a gainer. Ill do they
judge of this event, who think that any shadow of amends can be made for the
death of a brother, and the disappointment of all my schemes, by the accession
of some fortune, which I never can enjoy!

This is a mournful narrative: I will not, therefore, enlarge it. -- Amongst
all changes and chances, I often think of you; and pray there may be no
suspicion or jealousy betwixt us during the rest of our lives.

I am, dear Sir, most affectionately yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LXVII. To C -- W --, Esquire
ALAS! dear Mr. W --! the terrible event has happened! I have lost the best of
brothers; and you are to pity, not to condemn, your unfortunate correspondent.

About the middle of November I had prepared a letter for you, which lies now
amongst my papers. At that time, amidst all my apprehensions, I had some hopes
to support me; but before I could send it, my situation was greatly altered,
and the month did not wholly expire, till it had effectually rendered me the
most wretched of mankind.

Thus much it was necessary I should tell you; you will pardon me, if I do not
descend any farther into an account of merit that is lost, and of sorrow which
is too apt to revive of itself. Be assured, it is to me a loss which the whole
world cannot compensate; and an affliction which the longest time I can live
will not be able to erase.

You said, you would let Master W -- come and spend a few days with me. -- I
beseech you do. -- It will be some relief to me; and, God knows, I have
occasion enough for every assistance than can be drawn from correspondence,
company, or amusement.

You, Sir, I presume, proceed in the innocent recreations of your garden, and
those may at least prove a balance for any small disquiets that attend you. If
greater ills befall you, you have persons near you to alleviate them. A wife,
family, visitants, male and female friends in abundance, and a table
sufficiently hospitable to attract even your enemies. With me the case is
otherwise. What I have undergone this winter, may you never feel so much as in
apprehension!

Believe me, my friend, affectionately and invariably yours, W. SHENSTONE.
ix Kal. March, MDCCLII.
LXVIII. To the same.
July 22, 1752. Dear Mr. W --,
I DO not know why I made you a promise of a pretty long letter. What I now
write will be but a moderate one, both in regard to length and style; yet write
I must, par maniere d'acquit, and you have brought four-pence expense upon
yourself for a parcel of nonsense, and to no manner of purpose. This is not
tautology, you must observe; for nonsense sometimes answers very considerable
purposes. -- In love, it is eloquence itself. -- In friendship, therefore, by
all the rules of sound logic, you must allow it to be something; what I cannot
say, "nequeo monstrare, and sentio tantum." The principal part of a
correspondence betwixt two idle men consists in two important enquiries -- what
we do, and how we do; but as all persons ought to give satisfaction before they
expect to receive it, I am to tell you in the first place, that my own health
is tolerably good, or rather what I must call good, being, I think, much better
than it has been this last half year. -- Then as touching my occupation, alas!
"Othello's occupation's gone!" I neither read nor write aught besides a few
letters; and I give myself up entirely to scenes of dissipation; lounge at my
Lord Dudley's for near a week together; make dinners; accept of invitations;
sit up till three o'clock in the morning with young sprightly married women,
over white port and vin de paysans; ramble over my fields; issue out orders to
my hay-makers; foretell rain and fair weather; enjoy the fragance of hay, the
cocks, and the wind rows; admire that universal lawn, which is produced by the
scythe; sometimes inspect, and draw mouldings for my carpenters; sometimes
paper my walls, and at other times my cielings; do every social office that
falls in my way, but never seek out for any.

"Sed vos quid tandem? quae circumvolitas agilis thyma? non tu corpus eras sine
pectore. Non tibi parvum ingenium, non incultum est!" In short, what do you?
and how do you do? -- that is all.

Tell my young pupil, your son, he must by all manner of means send me a Latin
letter: and if he have any billet in French, for Miss Lea at The Grange, or
even in Hebrew, Coptic, or Syriac, I will engage it shall be received very
graciously. Thither am I going to dinner this day, and there, "implebor veteris
Bacchi, pinguisque ferinae."

All this looks like extreme jollity; but is this the true state of the case,
or may I not more properly apply the Spem vultu simulat, premit atrum cord
dolorem?

Accept this scrawl in place of a letter, and believe me

Ever most affectionately yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LXIX. To Mr. G --, on the Receipt of his Picture.
The Leasows, Oct. 3, 1752. Dear Mr. G --,
I AM very unfeignedly ashamed to reflect how long it is since I received your
present, and how much longer it is since I received your letter. I have been
resolving to write to you almost daily ever since you left me; yet have
foolishly enough permitted avocations (of infinitely less importance than your
correspondence) to interfere with my gratitude, my interest, and my
inclination. What apology I have to make, though no way adequate to my
negligence, is in short as follows. After the receipt of your letter, I
deferred writing till I could speak of the arrival of your picture. -- This did
not happen till about a month or five weeks ago, when I was embarrassed with
masons, carvers, carpenters, and company, all at a time. And though it were
idle enough to say, that I could not find one vacant hour for my purpose, yet
in truth my head was so confused by these multifarious distractions, that I
could have written nothing satisfactory either to myself or you: nothing worth
a single penny, supposing the postage were to cost you no more. The workmen had
not finished my rooms a minute, when Lady Luxborough, Mrs. Davies, and Mr.
Outing arrived, with five servants and a set of horses, to stay with me for
some time. After a nine days' visit, I returned with them to Barrels, where I
continued for a week; and whither (by the way) I go again with Lord Dudley in
about a fortnight's time. Other company filled up the interstices of my summer;
and I hope my dear friend will accept of this apology for so long a chasm of
silence, during which I have been uniformly at his service, and true to that
inviolable friendship I shall ever bear him.

I proceed now to thank you for the distinction, you show me, in sending me
your picture: I do it very sincerely, It is assuredly a strong likeness, as my
Lady Luxborough with all her servants that have seen you pronounce, as well as
I; consequently more valuable to a friend than a face he does not know, though
it were one of Raphael's: The smile about the mouth is bad, as it agrees but
ill with the gravity of the eyes; and as a smile, ever so little outre has a
bad effect in a picture where it is constant, though it may be ever so graceful
in a person where it is transitory. However, this may be altered, when I can
meet with a good painter. I have no other objection, but to the prominence of
the belly. The hair, I think, is good; and the coat and band no way
exceptionable. I have given it all the advantage I can: it has a good light,
and makes part of an elegant chimney-piece in a genteel, though little
breakfast-room, at the end of my house.

Mr. Whistler and I are now upon good terms, and two or three friendly letters
have been interchanged betwixt us. He presses me to come to Whitchurch; and I
him to come over to The Leasows; but the winter comes, when no man can visit.
-- The dispute is adjusted by time, whilst we are urging it by expostulation.
-- No uncommon event in most sublunary projects!

Lady Luxborough said very extraordinary things in praise of Mrs. G --, after
you left us at Barrels; yet I sincerely believe no more than she deserves. I
took the liberty of showing her your letter here, as it included a compliment
to her, which I thought particularly genteel. -- She will always consider you
as a person of genius, and her friend.

During most of this summer (wherein I have seen much company either here or at
Lord Dudley's) I have been almost constantly engaged in one continued scene of
jollity. I endeavored to find relief from such sort of dissipation; and, when
I had once given in to it, I was obliged to proceed; as, they say, is the case
when persons disguise their face with paint. -- Mine was a sort of painting
applied to my temper. "Spem vultu simulare, premere atrum cord dolorem." And
the moment I left it off, my soul appeared again all haggard and forlorn. My
company has now deserted me; the spleen-fogs begin to rise; and the terrible
incidents of last winter revive apace in my memory. This is my state of mind,
while I write you these few lines; yet, I thank God, my health is not much
amiss.

I did not forget my promise of a box, etc. to Mr. G --. I had a dozen sent me,
one or two of which I could have liked, had they been better finished. They
were of a good oval, white enamel, with flowers, etc. but horribly gilt, and
not accurately painted. I beg my best service to her, and will make a fresh
essay. My dearest friend, accept this awkward letter for the present. -- In a
few posts I will write again. -- Believe me yours from the bottom of my soul.

W. SHENSTONE.
I will send you a label for made-wine, after my own plan. It is enamelled,
with grapes, shepherd's pipe, etc. The motto VIN BE PAISAN.



LXX. To Mr. JAGO.
The Leasows, Nov. 15, 1752. Dear Mr. Jago,
COULD I with convenience mount my horse, and ride to Harbury this instant, I
should much more willingly do so than begin this letter. Such terrible events
have happened to us, since we saw each other last, that, however irksome it may
be to dwell upon them, it is, in the same degree, unnatural to substitute any
subject in their place.

I do sincerely forgive your long silence, my good friend, indeed I do; though
it gave me uneasiness. I hope you do the same by mine. I own, I could not
readily account for the former period of yours, any otherwise than by supposing
that I had said or done something, in the levity of my heart, which had given
you disgust; but being conscious to myself of the most sincere regard for you,
and believing it could never be discredited for any trivial inadvertencies, I
remember, I continued still in expectation of a letter, and did not dream of
writing till such time as I had received one. I trusted you would write at
last; and that, by all my past endeavors to demonstrate my friendship, you
would believe the tree was rooted in my heart, whatever irregularity you might
observe in the branches.

This was my situation before that dreadful era which gave me such a shock as
to banish my best friends for a time out of my memory. -- And when they
recurred, as they did the first of any thing, I was made acquainted with that
deplorable misfortune of yours! Believe me, I sympathized in your affliction,
notwithstanding my own; but, alas! what comfort could I administer, who had
need of every possible assistance to support myself? I wrote indeed a few
letters with difficulty; amongst the rest, one to my friend Graves; but it was
to vent my complaint. -- I will send you the letter, if you please, as it is by
far my least painful method of conveying you some account of my situation. Let
it convince you, that I could have written nothing at that time, which could
have been of any service to you: let it afford you, at least, a faint sketch of
my dearest brother's character; but let it not appear an ostentatious display
of sorrow, of which I am by no means guilty. I know but too well that I
discovered upon the occasion, what some would call, an unmanly tenderness; but
I know also, that sorrow upon such subjects as these is very consistent with
virtue, and with the most absolute resignation to the just decrees of
Providence. "Hominis est enim affici dolor, sentire; resistere tamen and
solatia admittere, non solatiis non egere." Pliny. -- I drank, purchased
amusements, never suffered myself to be a minute without company, no matter
what, so it was but continual. At length, by an attention to such conversation
and such amusements as I could at other times despise, I forgot so far as to be
cheerful. -- And after this, the summer, through an almost constant succession
of lively and agreeable visitants, proved even a scene of jollity. -- It was
inebriation all, though of a mingled nature; yet has it maintained a sort of
truce with grief, till time can assist me more effectually by throwing back the
event to a distance. -- Now, indeed, that my company have all forsaken me, and
I am delivered up to winter, silence, and reflection, the incidents of the last
year revive apace in my memory; and I am even astonished to think of the gaiety
of my summer. The fatal anniversary, the "dies quem semper acerbum, etc." is
beginning to approach, and every face of the sky suggests the ideas of last
winter. -- Yet I find myself cheerful in company; nor would I recommend it to
you to be much alone. -- You would lay the highest obligation upon me by coming
over at this time. -- I pressed your brother, whom I saw at Birmingham, to use
his influence with you; but if you can by no means undertake the journey, I
will take my speediest opportunity of seeing you at Harbury. -- Mr. Miller
invited me strenuously to meet Dr. Lyttelton at his house; but I believe my
most convenient season will be, when my Lord Dudley goes to Barrels; for I can
but ill bear the pensiveness of a long and lonely expedition. After all, if you
could come hither first, it would afford me the most entire satisfaction. -- I
have been making alterations in my house that would amuse you, and have many
matters to discourse with you, which it would be endless to mention upon paper.
-- Adieu, my dear friend! may your merit be known to some one who has greater
power to serve you than myself; but be assured, at the same time, that no one
loves you better, or esteems you more.

W. SHENSTONE.

LXXI. To the same.
The Leasows, Jan. 29, 1753. Dear Mr. Jago,
ALTHOUGH I have many reasons to urge why I did not write to you before, or
visit you from Barrels as I fully intended, I will venture to wave all
particulars till I see you; and only assure you in the general, that I was
never able to write any thing satisfactory, or to visit you, at that time, with
any sort of convenience.

Believe me, my good friend, if inclination might have ruled, I had been with
you at Harbury many weeks ago. Sure I am, they must be the cares of home, and
not the pleasures of it, that ever were sufficient to detain me during the
winter season. Nor do I think I have an enemy that wishes me more miserable
than I have, almost constantly, found myself ever since the beginning of it.

I cannot even now fix a time when I can see you; and perhaps it may be
deferred till Mr. Miller's place will have received some advantage from the
Spring; and, in that case, I would infallibly see my Lord Guildford's; but I
leave this undetermined; and I hope, if you can wander from home with any kind
of satisfaction, you will do me the justice to believe, that you have no friend
alive who will more gladly receive you than myself.

I have papered some rooms this last year, and would willingly have you see
them before their colors are vanished; which, I think, will unavoidably be the
case of one, before a second summer be half concluded.

Thus is beauty as uncertain as either fortune or fame.

I suppose you have heard there is a citation from Doctors Commons, and a writ
of "Ne exeat" out against Mr. W -- for an intrigue with --. If you have not, be
not precipitate in spreading the story. -- They say, he has fled into France on
the occasion. -- What a shocking affair is this! so early in life! so
extensive, so lasting, so irremediable in its consequences! but, Sic visum
Veneri! cui placet impares
Formas atque animos, sub juga ahenea,
Saevo mittere cum joco!
Your misfortunes and mine incline us, almost, to love all people that are
miserable; but how will the daughters of the Philistines rejoice on the
occasion; nay, almost countenance another's loss of virtue by manifesting their
own apparent want of humanity!

There is a most admirable piece of allegory on this head in the Female Fables,
by Brooks, if I mistake not; to whom the author in his preface acknowledges
himself greatly indebted.

I am truly sorry to understand how much you are alone; I really imagined you
were much happier in point of company than myself, as you live in a much
politer neighborhood; amongst persons of genius, learning and humanity. And
happier you are; for however I make a shift to scrape some company around me,
they are such as can affect me with little else besides the spleen.

Do not dwell too much on subjects that make you thoughtful; superficial
amusements are out point, till some time hence: I am an ill adviser; but I
prescribe you the methods which I have found most effectual with myself.

I have not been forgetful of the task that you enjoined me, to give you my
observations on the verses which you enclosed. -- I will write my sentiments on
a separate paper. Do not punish me with silence and suspense concerning you,
but write. I can ardently desire what I but little deserve, being

Your most affectionate friend, W. S.

LXXII. To the same.
The Leasows, Feb. 17, 1753. Dear Mr. Jago,
I WROTE you some account of myself, and enclosed some trivial criticisms, in a
letter I sent you about a fortnight ago, which I hope you have received. -- Tom
comes now to enquire after your health, and to bring back my ode to Colonel
Lyttelton; in regard to which, I desire, that you will not be sparing of your
animadversions. I whispered my difficulties to Mr. Miller at Hagley, how
delicate I found the subject, and how hard it was to satisfy either myself or
others; in all which points he agreed with me. Nevertheless, having twice broke
my promise of sending a corrected copy to Sir George, I was obliged to make my
peace by a fresh one, which, I suppose, I must, of necessity, perform. -- Give
me your whole sentiments hereupon, I beseech you; in particular and in general,
as a critic and as a friend. -- The bad state of spirits which I complained of
in my last, for a long time together made me utterly irresolute: every thing
occasioned me suspense; and I did nothing with appetite. -- This was owing in a
great measure to a slow nervous fever, as I have since discovered by many
concurrent symptoms. It is now, I think, wearing off by degrees. I seem to
anticipate a little of that "vernal delight" which Milton mentions, and thinks
Able to chase
All sadness, but despair.
At least, I begin to resume my silly clue of hopes and expectations; which, I
know, however, will not guide me to any thing more satisfactory than before.

I have read scarce any new books this season. Voltaire's new Tragedy was sent
me from London; but what has given me the most amusement, has been the "Lettres
de Madame de Maintenon." You have probably read them already in English, and
then I need not recommend them. The Life of Lord Bolingbroke is entirely his
public life, and the book three parts filled with political remarks.

As to writing, I have not attempted it this year and more; nor do I know when
I shall again. -- However, I would be glad to correct that Ode "To the Duchess
of Somerset," when once I can find in whose hands it is deposited. I was shown
a very elegant letter of hers, the other day; wherein she asks for it with
great politeness. And as it includes nothing but a love of rural life, and such
sort of amusements as she herself approves, I shall stand a good chance of
having it received with partiality. She lives the life of a religieuse. She has
written my Lady Luxborough a very serious letter of condolance upon the
misfortune in her family; and need enough has Lady Luxborough of so
unchangeable a friend! for sure nothing could have happened to a person in her
situation more specifically unfortunate. -- Mr. Reynolds has been at Barrels, I
hear, and has brought her a machine that goes into a coat-pocket, yet answers
the end of "a jack for boots, a reading-desk, a cribbage-board, a pair of
snuffers, a ruler, an eighteen inch-rule, three pair of nut-cracks, a
lemon-squeezer, two candlesticks, a picquet board, and the Lord knows what
beside." -- Can you form an idea of it? if you can, do you not think it must
give me pain to reflect, that I myself am useful for no sort of purpose, when a
paltry bit of wood can answer so many? but, indeed, whilst it pretends to these
exploits, it performs nothing well; and therein I agree with it. So true it is,
with regard to me, what I told you long ago, Multa and praeclara minantem
Vivere nec recte, nec suaviter!


We have a turnpike bill upon the point of being brought into the House of
Commons; it will convey you about half the way betwixt Birmingham and Hales,
and from thence to Hagley; but, I trust, there will be a left hand attraction,
which will always make you deviate from the strait line.

I should be ashamed to reflect how much I have dwelt upon myself in this
letter; but that I seriously approve of egotism in letters; and were I not to
do so, I should not have any other subject. I have not a single neighbor, that
is either fraught with politeness, literature, or intelligence; much less have
I a tide of spirits to set my invention afloat; but the less I am able to amuse
you, the more desirous am I of your letters; which afford me the truest
entertainment, even when my spirits are ever so much depressed.

That universal cheerfulness which is the lot of some people, persons that you
and I may envy at the same time that we despise, is worth all that either
fortune or nature can bestow.

I am, with entire affection, Yours, W. SHENSTONE

LXXIII. To Mr. GRAVES.
The Leasows, Mar. 28, 1753. Dear Mr. Graves,
I AM vexed to find you have no copy of those verses. -- I must make a fresh
enquiry; and should they happen to accompany this letter, as I fear they will
not, be so good as to assist me all you can in the way of hints and
corrections. Corrections of what is, and hints of what may be. I do not reckon
much upon these verses, or the patronage which you mention; though the Duchess
is a woman of high reputation, and has as much benevolence as any woman upon
earth.

I do not include the design of visiting Bath as a public place: I have long
since given up such schemes of gaiety and expense. I visit you and Mrs. Graves;
at the least, I mean to do so.

Inoculatioin is a point on which I never speak a syllable in the way of pro or
con: I mean, not so as to influence particulars; for, in the general, I esteem
it both right and salutary, and even right because we find it salutary.

I do not know whether I could not bear the dishonor of friends or relations
better than their death. -- It must afford one no small satisfaction to give
them one's affection and assistance under every frailty to which human nature
is exposed; at least, so long as they are true to friendship. It is Mr.
Whistler's opinion, as well as mine. But Mr. -- 's case is altogether
different; and I make no question that he thinks as you do upon the occasion.

Poor Danvers's death affects me more than you would perhaps imagine. If you
remember, I was at M -- when the scheme of his going abroad was in agitation.
-- I think how this event must affect Mrs. T --, whose concern will not be
lessened by her long separation from him. I dare say he reckoned upon his
relations here as his best estate, whatever he might gain elsewhere; and, no
doubt, the hope of retiring amongst them has been a constant spur to his
diligence. -- The event was always uncertain, and has proved at last
unfortunate; yet, as Melmoth says very justly, "The course of human affairs
requires that we should act with vigor upon very precarious contingencies." --
I desire you would give me a sight of the Latin inscription.

I think it was the Gentleman's Magazine in which I was shown your verses.

I have a particular and lively idea of your place; though I do not remember to
have seen even such parts of a scene as I have united together in my
imagination. I cannot think otherwise than that the front-door opens here, the
garden-door there, the stream runs in this place, etc. etc.

Hac ibat Simois, haec est Sigeia tellus. The sight of the place could not
impress my imagination more deeply; though the impression I am to acquire will
hardly leave one line of my present one remaining. Cabbage-garden ornee is very
high burlesque, and affects the improvements of your friend too nearly.

Let me know in what manner Mrs. Graves and you are drawn. Be as particular as
you please.

I could not be clear from your letter whether you had received the box or not.
That, together with the tallies, lay on the table before me, while I wrote to
you last; and went with my letter to Birmingham. -- Pray satisfy me directly
whether you received them. -- They are trifles, indeed; but, as they acquit me
of my promise, they are virtually of consequence.

Mr. Whistler has not answered a letter which I sent him above two months ago:
nay, I think, a quarter of a year.

You are rich. -- I have only to wish the continuance of your riches, with some
diminution of your fatigue. And yet the most laborious man in the world is, I
am fully assured, more happy than the laziest.

"The Rival Brothers" has some of Dr. Young's affectations; and I question if
the moral be absolutely true -- at least, Mr. Addison is in some measure
against it: but, on the whole, I think it a noble Tragedy; abounding as much
with refined sentiments and elevated expressions, as "The Gamester" and "The
Earl of Essex" are deficient in both.

My verses are not yet sent to Sir George Lyttelton; I start new difficulties,
and cannot make them to my mind: yet have promised him a copy, and disappointed
him thrice; and can hardly defer it much longer without great offense.

I have scarce been twenty yards from home this winter. Last night I visited
one of my neighbors; and what with wine, sitting up late, a perfect flux of
discourse, and a return home through the dark, found myself vertiginous before
I was aware. Never did Prior's manly description, "I drank, I liked it not,
etc." seem so natural to me as it does today. I am absolutely vile in my own
sight, and I abhor myself in dust and ashes. I was never so intoxicated as not
to know what I said, or to talk more nonsense; and yet how many things could I
wish unsaid that I let fall last night!

We are going to add two new bells to our present set of six; to have a
turnpike-road from Hagley to Birmingham, through Hales; and to emerge a little
from our obscurity. I am, dear Sir, with compliments to Mrs. Graves,

Ever most affectionately yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LXXIV. To the same, with Observations on Arms, Inscriptions, etc.
The Leasows, July 25, 1753. Dear Mr. Graves,
I SEND you my Ode, as I sent it to the Duchess some weeks ago. Why I pitched
upon one reading sooner than another, I will not now explain: nor will I
trouble you to make any fresh remarks upon it at present; only, when you happen
to read it over at your leisure, if any thing occurs to you that would tend to
perfect it, I would beg you occasionally to make some memorandums. I have not
yet received an answer; but, as I accompanied the verses with a letter, I
suppose I shall receive one in return. I also added, to fill a blank space in
my paper-book, a poem which I call "The Vista;" and which you may perhaps
recollect: how properly I know not, for I had the benefit of no person's
judgment or advice.

Lord Dudley made Mr. Dolman a present of a piece of plate, a large cup, in
consideration of his sister's being at Broom about half a year. There was on
it, one supporter awkwardly enough holding up the coronet in his paw; and from
the coronet proceeded a label, with "amoris ergo Dudley." I do not know who was
the manager, or whence he had the inscription; but I think, from Dr. H --. This
is elegant and enough. Nevertheless, as there may be some convenience in
dazzling the eyes of the people where I dwell, and as such eyes as theirs are
not to be dazzled, and hardly struck, by elegance alone, I chose the method
that was most magnificent. -- I wish they are not invidious enough to say, that
his arms are engraved there for want of some of my own: so I would not be long
before their notable suggestion. -- I have truly so low an opinion of arms
since they became purchaseable by money, and since the present unlimited use of
them, that were I to find a coat to my name in the office, which I did not
like, I would not use it; but substitute what was more agreeable: yet some sort
of right or claim is requisite to satisfy one's delicacy, with an opinion of
property; and indeed, to fix one's choice, where one has the whole furniture of
the universe for its object. -- After all, the vulgar are more struck with arms
than any thing; "stupet in titulis and imaginibus;" and, I believe, there were
near two hundred people gathered round Lady Luxborough's landau at Birmingham,
and declaring her arms to be very noble, or otherwise. -- I do not, therefore,
choose to employ a vulgar mind about this matter. -- Were you to go London, I
should gladly solicit you; or if you have any friend you could write to in
town, to search the office; for really I have none that I like for the purpose.
It will not cost above a couple of shillings. -- I will send you a draught of
the lid of my standish when it arrives: -- for I really do not know what Mr.
Hylton will put upon it: I find, he consults with Dr. B --, my Lord's
physician. -- " De Dudley" would run most abominably, and "Baro Dudley" may be
authorized by the frequent practice of Maittaire. -- If it be inscribed
"Dudley" alone, I can add the rest if I should hereafter think proper; and I
wish it may be so.

My verses to the Colonel are not yet transcribed.

I think the Latin inscription to your brother very elegant; and I should not
care to have any part of it omitted. -- I would, by all means, have this little
history of his life perpetuated. "His saltem, etc." And were you to put it into
English, it would be too long for an inscription; -- unless you were, by means
of a printed elegy with notes, or any other such method, to produce the same
effect; and then you might make the epitaph as short as you pleased. -- After
all the first method is perhaps as eligible. When the affair is nearer a
conclusion, I should be glad to be of any service. -- I will think, and write
again about it,

And now, having spoke to such matters as have been the subject of our late
correspondence, I am at liberty to diversify my letter as I may. -- I should be
glad to know in your next whether you have heard of late from Mr. Whistler; and
whether he is confined at home as usual by his mother's state of health. I
almost despair of ever seeing him again at The Leasows, though there is hardly
any pleasure I so much covet as that of surprising him with the alterations I
have made, and the articles I have purchased, during the five years since he
was in Shropshire: add to this, the several acquaintances I have formed which
he would like, and the amusing visits I could pay hereabouts with freedom. -- I
do not know whether you saw Mr. Davenport and his family at Bath this spring.
He is laying out his environs, and I am by appointment to go over the week
after next. He has also a painter at this time taking views round his house;
which is one of the most magnificent in our country; yet I never leave home but
with reluctance. -- I really love no PLACE so well; and it is a great favor in
me to allot any one a week of my summer. -- Add to this, that my constitution
requires nursing; and I am most happy, where I am most free. It is in vain to
say, they allow you all freedom, where you cannot allow it yourself. For this
reason, I never more enjoy myself, than I do at The Grange; and yet this to
some may appear paradoxical.

I yesterday embellished my chalybeate spring. -- The inscription that is out
on the stone, is as follows, viz. FONS FERRVGINEVS. Yet I question whether some
of the following be not preferable; if they are, I beg you will tell me. One
shilling and sixpence produces the alteration: FONS FERRVGINEVS. or, DIVAE PER
QVAM LATEBRAE or, DIVAE LOCORVM OMNIVM or, DIVAE NIMIRVM RVSTICAE or, DIVAS CVI
DEBETVR or, DIVAE PER QVAM LICET

Believe me ever, with my best compliments to Mrs. Graves,

Your most obligde and most affectionate servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LXXV. To Mr. JAGO.
The Leasows, Jan. 29, 1754. Dear Mr. Jago,
I AM at a loss how to begin this letter. -- I will not, however, after the
usual way, give you a tedious list of apologies in the front of it. Some
account of my long silence you will find dispersed throughout the letter; and
as for what is deficient, I will depend upon your friendship.

There has not been a person here since you left me, of whom I could obtain the
least intelligence concerning you. And as an enquiry by the post was my only
obvious method, I do acknowledge myself to blame, notwithstanding all the
excuses that I can make.

Amidst the conflux of visitants whom I received this season, I was hardly once
so happy as I was in your company. I was the happier in seeing you so; and, if
you remember, I took notice at the time, how little your vivacity was impaired
in comparison of my own. If I was then but a dull companion, guess whether
solitude and winter were likely to make me a better correspondent. That vein of
gaiety and humor, which you were once so partial as to discover in my letters,
will scarce appear there any more: not even to the eyes of the most partial
friend I have. Should you deny what I assert, and impute it to a fit of spleen,
yet you may allow that it will scarce enliven any letter that I write in
winter. Friendship still remains! Friendship, like the root of some perennial
flower, even then perhaps gathers strength in secret; that it may afford a
better display of its colors in the spring.

I do not pretend this to be an adequate apology. I know, my dearest friend,
that you both like to see and hear from me: it proves, however, that you have
no great loss either of my letters or my company.

I am, as the phrase is, deeply penetrated by the civilities of your Mr.
Miller. He took a short dinner with me once this season, dropping Sir George at
Mr. P -- 's. -- He could not have pleased me better. -- Here he happened to
meet Mr. Lyttelton and Captain Whood. He afterward breakfasted here, and in
general seemed glad of every occasion to bring me the genteelest company. To
him I owe Miss Banks and Lord Temple. Can you think that Radway now, as well as
Harbury, has no attractions for me? You know me too well; but I have not truly
such a state of health as to dare to be from home. Friends will say "you may be
as free at our houses as your own, etc." and they will mean as they say; but if
you cannot make yourself so, what is all this to the purpose?

I cannot give you a detail of what has passed with me since I saw you. Lord
Dudley, with myself, made one visit to Lord Plymouth's. We met Mr. and Mrs.
Winnington. -- We took a trip to Mr. Vernon's, where we found Mr. Coventry and
other company. The impressions I received from them would afford subject for
conversation betwixt you and me; but I must not assign too much of my paper to
that purpose.

Lord Plymouth's piece of water should have been a serpentine river. I could
give you strong reasons. -- I think my Lord such a character as will make a
reputable figure in life: -- beloved he is, and must be at first sight. -- Lady
Plymouth is the most amiable of women; and, of all the world, the properest
person that my Lord could have chosen. The plan for their house I think right;
supposing it right to continue it where it is. The park is capable of some
considerable beauties. Lord Plymouth has been once here since, and talks of
causing me to come, and design for his environs. -- I seem to be highly in his
favor. -- I hope some time to meet you there.

My Ode, after an astonishing delay, was presented to the Duchess of Somerset.
-- It produced me two genteel letters from her Grace. I am well satisfied with
the event, for some reasons, which I will one day give you -- none of moment.
-- Soon after this, Dodsley pressed me to contribute, as amply as I pleased, to
a fourth volume of his Miscellanies. I at first meant to do so pretty largely;
I then changed my mind, and sent only some little pieces. Part of these were my
own; part Mr. Whistler's, Mr. Graves's, and some accidental pieces of others,
which I found in my bureau. -- I purposed to send something of yours too; of
myself, if I was hurried; else, not without your consent. What I thought of
was, your Linnets. Last week he writes me word, that the town will now be too
much engrossed by the business of elections; and that he does not proceed this
winter. -- So that we shall now, you see, have time to meet, or write upon the
subject.

Mr. Graves sent me the enclosed little, fable, for Dodsley, if I approved it.
-- I made some alterations, and sent it. -- Return it to me, if you please. --
It is pretty; but the inscription must be "To a Friend."

Some correspondence I have had this winter with Mr. Hylton, about toys and
trinkets which he gets done for me in London. He is by far a better friend and
correspondent than a poet. Should you take a trip to town, he would be quite
proud to see you.

I am now, like the rest of the world, perusing Sir Charles Grandison. -- I
know not whether that world joins me, in preferring Clarissa. The author wants
the art of abridgement in every thing that he has written, yet I am much his
admirer.

My dear friend! cherish and preserve your own vivacity, and let not this
phlegmatic epistle impair it. If occasion offers, call on me for my own sake;
and believe you have not alive a more affectionate friend.

W. SHENSTONE.

LXXVI. To Mr. GRAVES, on the Alternations of Pleasure and Pain.
The Leasows, April 19, 1754. Dear Mr. Graves,
IT is a long, long time, according to the computation of friendship, since I
had the pleasure of a line from you, and I write chiefly to remind you of it;
not with any hopes of affording you the amusement of a single minute. In truth,
I have not spirits for it. The severity, the duration, the solitude, of this
winter have well-nigh exhausted them. -- The succession, the regular
succession, of pain and pleasure becomes every day more clear to me. It begins
to seem as ordinary as the course of day and night. Thus my last summer was the
most amusing I ever saw; my winter the most disagreeable. Allow me to accept
one only: I mean, that ever-mournful winter which robbed me of my dearest
relation. Sometimes this pain and pleasure are contrasted within the compass of
a day. Sometimes, in different weeks, etc. etc. However, do not think me
superstitious. There is hardly a person that is less so. Yet I am firmly
persuaded of the alternation, either in the mind, or in the events themselves.
My summer, I said before, was highly entertaining; my winter rendered equally
disagreeable, by a long-continued squabble amongst our principal parishioners,
and by the death of my best-beloved and the most accomplished of my relations,
M -- D --. She risqued going to London for the sake of finding something new;
was seized with the smallpox, and died in all her bloom. -- The natural
consequence which we should draw from observations of this sort is, equanimity;
"aequam memento rebus, etc." and again, "sperat infestis metuit secundis, etc."
Enough of this, which I should not mention, but that the fact itself strikes me
continually more and more; and were I to mark the pleasing and unpleasing parts
of my existence in an almanac, as the Romans did their Fasti and Nefasti, I
know not if, at the year's end, the black and white marks would not nearly
balance each other.

I have bought Hogarth's Analysis: it is really entertaining; and has, in some
measure, adjusted my notions with regard to beauty in general. For instance,
were I to draw a shield, I could give you reasons from hence why the shape was
pleasing or disagreeable. I would have you borrow and read it.

Grandison I cannot think equal to Clarissa; though, were merit in this age to
be preferred, the author of it deserves a bishopric.

Jago has been fortunate for once; but the value of his livings must be
exaggerated in the newspapers.

If Mr. Whistler would give me a visit in the height of my season this year, I
would look upon it as one of the most pleasing events that could happen to the
remainder of my life; and I would not presume to hope that fate would ever
allow me a repetition of it.

My love of toys is not quite exhausted. -- I have purchased, or rather
renovated, some that are both rich and beautiful, though short of what I meant
them. I have amused myself with designing little ornaments this winter, some of
which may turn to account under the management of some Birmingham mechanic. --
To atchieve ease, in that season, is the most, that I can hope; and it is more
than I often obtain.

Excuse this worthless letter; which must cost you money, as they tell me
franks are useless. I could not avoid some uneasiness upon reflecting how long
you have been silent. Present my best compliments to Mrs. Graves; and pay a
tribute of one single half-sheet to that affection with which I am ever

Yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LXXVII. To the same, on the Death of Mr. WHISTLER.
The Leasows, June 7, 1754. Dear Mr. Graves,
THE melancholy account of our dear friend Whistler's death was conveyed to me,
at the same instant, by yours and by his brother's letter. I have written to
his brother this post: though I am very ill able to write upon the subject, and
would willingly have waved it longer, but for decency. The triumvirate which
was the greatest happiness, and the greatest pride, of my life is broken! The
fabric of an ingenuous and disinterested friendship has lost a noble column!
yet it may, and will, I trust, endure till one of us be laid as low. In truth,
one can so little satisfy one's self with what we say upon such sad occasions,
that I made three or four essays before I could endure what I had written to
his brother. -- Be so good as to excuse me to him as well as you can, and
establish me in the good opinion of him and Mr. Walker.

Poor Mr. Whistler! how do all our little strifes and bickerments appear to us
at this time! yet we may with comfort reflect, that they were not of a sort
that touched the vitals of our friendship; and I may say that we fondly loved
and esteemed each other, of necessity. "Tales animas oportuit esse concordes."
Poor Mr. Whistler! not a single acquaintance have I made, not a single picture
or curiosity have I purchased, not a single embellishment have I given to my
place, since he was last here, but I have had his approbation and his amusement
in my eye. I will assuredly inscribe my larger urn to his memory; nor shall I
pass it without a pleasing melancholy during the remainder of my days. We have
each of us received a pleasure from his conversation, which no other
conversation can afford us at our present time of life.

Adieu! my dear friend! may our remembrance of the person we have lost be the
strong and everlasting cement of our affection! Assure Mr. John Whistler of the
regard I have for him, upon his own account, as well as his brother's. Write to
me; directly if you have opportunity. Whether you have or no, believe me to be
ever most affectionately yours.

W. SHENSTONE.
I beg my compliments to Mrs. Graves.



LXXVIII. To the same.
The Leasows, July 15, 1754. Dear Mr. Graves,
THE particulars relating to our poor friend's departure occasioned me much
concern, and indeed some tears: yet as those particulars are what one covets to
hear, and the melancholy which they produce is never unmixed with pleasure, I
think myself much obliged to you for the care you took to convey them. It is
possible, the letters I wrote to you and Mr. J. Whistler might appear too
tender from a mere friend of the deceased; but there is a sympathy betwixt
friends, which is not always found amongst relations; nor does kindred imply
friendship a whit more than friendship does kindred. It is not many weeks ago,
that I had a bill filed against me in Chancery by young D --, the only near
relation I have by the mother's side; and the next in lineal succession to my
share of the Penn's estate. -- Do not let this surprise you. I believe the
affair will be accommodated. -- He only wanted to procure a division of the
Harborough estate at a large expense, which might be better adjusted without
any; in other words, to run his head against a stone-wall, that he might have a
chance of causing it to tumble upon me. Would you consent that I should suffer
him to have the mansion house at Harborough thrown into his lot? Were I so to
do, I could make it advantageous to myself, and the dispute were at an end; but
I have a kind of romantic veneration for that place and family; which, if you
remember, I have expressed in one of my best elegies Elegy xv.
.

Pray what will become of our letters to Mr. Whistler? as I am not conscious of
any thing dishonorable in mine (and I am sure I may say the same of yours)
methinks I could wish that they might not be destroyed. It is from a few
letters of my own or others alone, accidentally preserved, that I am able to
recollect what I have been doing since I was born.

I met, when I was last at Barrels, a surgeon of Bath, whose name, I think, was
Cleland. He knew your name and place; but, I find, was not personally
acquainted with you. -- I am glad enough to hear that your place gets into
vogue. It is, I think, what you should choose, upon all accounts. Let the beauty
of the place guide them to the merits of its owner. I have often thought,
myself, that were a person to live at The Leasows, of more merit than myself,
and a few degrees more worldly prudence, he could scarce want opportunities to
procure his own advancement. My rural embellishments are perhaps more
considerable than yours; but then the vicinity of Bath might occasion you a
greater conflux. -- Your unexpensive illuminations please me highly. -- I have
purposed these many years to purchase a set of tin lamps, of about four-pence
a-piece, to stick against trees, and to use upon occasion in my coppice; or
rather in my grove, where some of the water-falls would not fail to show
delightfully.

You asked me about Jago's preferment. The living last given him by the Bishop
of Worcester is, I believe, near an hundred pounds a year. -- With this, he has
Harbury of about fifty; and Cheslerton, a sort of chapel of ease, about forty;
in the whole, therefore, about a hundred and ninety: but then he is obliged to
keep a curate; and what I think yet worse is, that he cannot make it convenient
to live at his new situation, which is a pretty one.

I have had some visitants this season; indeed as many, and as considerable, as
such a sort of season could afford me. A Scotch peer called upon me in his way
through Birmingham: his title was --. He seemed to have a very clear head, a
very polite and easy manner, and all the refinement of true taste, without the
warmth or appetite. -- I could not help thinking him, on many accounts,
characteristic of the Scottish nation.

Would to God I could see you and Mrs. Graves here this summer! I have the same
wish it may be my lot to visit you, next autumn. Be assured, I purpose it.

I expect Dodsley every week. He will, I am convinced, be for publishing his
Miscellany next winter. Would Mr. W --, think you, agree, that you and I should
be allowed to publish such of poor Mr. Whistler's papers there, as we judged
were most likely to do credit to his memory?

Adieu! dear Mr. Graves. Let us reconcile our affections to the ordinary events
of life; and let us adopt my friend Jago into our second triumvirate. I am,
however, always, with peculiar attachment, yours,

W. SHENSTONE.
My best compliments to Mrs. Graves.


P. S. Since I wrote the foregoing, I have had Mr. Davenport of
Davenport-house, with all his family. -- His brother, the clergyman, remembered
you by your picture. -- His wife is the finest person, etc. I have seen here,
except Lady Aylesbury -- ingenious, easy-behaved, and of an excellent temper.
-- They come to Bath in a fortnight.

Since that time, Sir George Lyttelton, Mr. Lyttelton, and Miss Lyttelton. Sir
George thinks some alterations requisite in my verses, to which I cannot bring
myself easily to conform -- but must.

I look upon my scheme of embellishing my farm as the only lucky one I ever
pursued in my life. -- My place now brings the world home to me, when I have
too much indolence to go forth in quest of it.



LXIX. To the same, on hearing that his Letters to Mr. Whistler were destroyed.
The Leasows, Oct. 23, 1754. Dear Mr. Graves,
IT is certainly some argument of a peculiarity in the esteem I bear you, that
I feel a readiness to acquaint you with more of my foibles, than I care to
trust with any other person. I believe nothing shows us more plainly either the
different degrees or kinds of regard that we entertain for our several friends
(I may also add the difference of their characters) than the ordinary style and
tenor of the letters we address to them.

I confess to you, that I am considerably mortified by Mr. John W -- 's conduct
in regard to my letters to his brother; and, rather than they should have been
so unneccessarily destroyed, would have given more money than is allowable for
me to mention with decency. I look upon my letters as some of my
chef-d'oeuvres; and, could I be supposed to have the least pretensions to
propriety of style or sentiment, I should imagine it must appear, principally,
in my letters to his brother, and one or two more friends. I considered them as
the records of a friendship that will be always dear to me; and as the history
of my mind for these twenty years last past. The amusement I should have found
in the perusal of them would have been altogether innocent; and I would gladly
have preserved them, if it were only to explain those which I shall preserve of
his brother's. Why he should allow either me or them so very little weight as
not to consult me with regard to them, I can by no means conceive. I suppose it
is not uncustomary to return them to the surviving friend. I had no answer to
the letter which I wrote Mr. J. W --. I received a ring from him; but as I
thought it an inadequate memorial of the friendship which his brother had for
me, I gave it to my servant the moment I received it; at the same time I have a
neat standish, on which I caused the lines Mr. W -- left with it to be
inscribed; and which appears to me a much more agreeable remembrancer.

I have read your new production with pleasure; and as this letter begins with
a confession of foibles, I will own, that through mere laziness I have sent you
back your copy, in which I have made some erasements, instead of giving you my
reasons on which those erasements were founded. Truth is, it seems to me to
want mighty few variations from what is now the present text; and that, upon
one more perusal, you will be able to give it as much perfection as you mean it
to have. And yet, did I suppose you would insert it in Dodsley's Collection, as
I see no reason you have to the contrary, I would take any pains about it that
you should desire me. I must beg another copy, at your leisure.

I should like the inscription you mention upon a real stone-urn, which you
purchase very reasonable at Bath; but you must not risque it upon the vase you
mention, on any account whatever.

Now I mention Bath, I must acquaint you, that I have received intelligence
from the younger Dodsley, that his brother is now there, and that none of the
papers I sent him are yet sent to press; that he expects his brother home about
the fourth or fifth of November, when he proceeds with his publication.
Possibly you may go to Bath whilst he is there, and, if so, may choose to have
an interview.

I shall send two or three little pieces of my own, in hopes that you will
adjust the reading, and return them as soon as you conveniently can. All I can
send tonight is this "Ode to Memory." I shall in the last place desire your
opinion as to the manner of placing what is sent. The first pages of his
Miscellany must be already fixed. I think to propose ours for the last; but as
to the order, it will depend entirely upon you.

Adieu! in other words, God bless you! -- I have company at the table all the
time I am writing.

Your ever most affectionate W. SHENSTONE.

LXXX. To Mr. JAGO.
The Leasows, June 16, 1754. Dear Mr. Jago,
WERE I to pronounce my sentence upon the long suspension of our
correspondence, I should impute the blame of it, in almost equal measure, to
yourself and to me. To you, for an omission of the letter you promised me, when
last in town; to me, for waiting in expectation of it, and for neglecting to do
justice to the sentiments of my heart on the occasion of your late preferment.
Great were the hopes I had indeed conceived, that your increase of revenue had
been accompanied with a place of residence which was more to your mind than
that where you at present abide; but I do not find by any accounts that you
purpose to leave Harbury; for which, no doubt, you have reasons which I do not
yet penetrate; but which may demand my assent the moment you discover them. I
have but little to say of the life I have led since you received some account
of me from Mr. Hylton in London. The Winter, or at least its ministers,
continued to tyrannize during the minority of Spring; and the Spring has alike
been slow in giving up the reins to Summer. Of consequence, I seem in a sort of
middle state, betwixt a dull half-animated grub, and an insignificant
loco-motive fly. Neither in the one state or other am I of the least
importance; but, from the advances which I have already made, you are somewhat
the more likely to find me in your garden. About a fortnight ago I received a
line or two from our intimate acquaintance and school-fellow Mr. Hall. It was
brought me by Sir Edward Boughton's gardener; a fellow of good taste, to whom
Mr. Hall desired I would cause The Leasows to be shown. I find you have
delighted Mrs. Hall by some alterations which you propose for their environs,
and which they thoroughly resolve to put in execution. When I come over into
Warwickshire, as I hope to do soon, I shall be very glad to make them a visit
in your company. My spirits, though far from good, are better, in the main,
than they were in winter; and, on some peculiar days, are raised as high as to
alacrity: very seldom higher; seldom so high.

You must (from hence at least) take matters in the order or rather disorder in
which they occur: Mr. Miller I saw on Wednesday last in Lady Lyttelton's coach,
who stopped two minutes at my gate on her return from London. I enquired
concerning you; but could gather no intelligence. -- Mr. Hylton, who is now in
Warwickshire (if he have not strolled to London) has been with me several
months this summer. He is adding a room or two to his place, which lies very
near me; and purposes to reside there as soon as it is finished. The situation
is not void of beauties; but, if you will pardon the vanity, must veil its
bonnet to mine. I have heard of planting hollies, pyracanthas, and other
berry-bearing greens, to attract those Black-birds which you have so
effectually celebrated: it shall be my ambition to plant good neighbors; and,
what with Lord Dudley and his exotics, Mr. Hylton with his fossils, and myself
with my ferme ornee, is there not some room to expect that we may attract the
tasters this way? but first we must take some care to advertise them where
their treasures lie. -- Another day is passed, and Mr. Miller, etc. has again
been with me, and waked me out of a sound sleep to breakfast. -- He mentions
with what reluctance he left a surveyor at Radway, employed in taking plans of
the field of battle near Edgehill. This he purposes to enrich with a number of
anecdotes, gleaned from his neighborhood; which must probably render it
extremely entertaining: and surely Edge-bill fight was never more unfortunate
to the nation, than it was lucky for Mr. Miller. He prints, together with this
plan, another sheet of Radway Castle. I approve his design. He will, by these
means, turn every bank and hillock of his estate there, if not into classical,
at least into historical ground.

I have done mighty little about my grounds since last winter. As indolence has
on many occasions contributed to impair my finances, it is but just that it
should sometimes contribute to restore them. Yet I am not quite destitute of
something new for your amusement.

Of late I have neither read nor written a syllable. What pleased me last was
Hogarth's Analysis. I expect Dodsley down every week; and as he will spend a
few days with me, I could wish you were to meet him. His genius is truly
poetical, and his sentiments altogether liberal and ingenuous.

I am, at present, a surveyor of roads: employed in repairing my lane to the
turnpike -- How glad should I be to meet you, and to show you its beauties! to
show you Mr. Hylton's new series of coins; -- his designs as well as his
performances at Lappa! -- how glad should I be to see you! yea, I would hardly
fail to return with you to Harbury; were you to add this one obligation. I left
Mr. Miller in doubt whether he would not see me at Radway some time next week.
Evil and capricious health (the particulars of which would make a detail of no
importance) destroys all my punctuality, and bids me promise with fear. You, I
trust, are mostly at home; and were you to be at Snitterfield, I would follow
you without reluctance. So, with hopes to see you shortly, either in
Warwickshire or Shropshire, I relinquish the subject.

I have reserved a very melancholy subject for the last. May you, and Mr.
Graves, and myself, stand firm to support the fabric of friendship, which has
lost a very beautiful column in poor Mr. Whistler! he died of a sore throat,
which in a few days time turned to an inward mortification. -- I will say no
more on the occasion: very affecting has it been to me. -- God preserve your
life, your happiness, and your friendships! and may you ever be assured of that
with which I am, dear Sir,

Your most affectionate humble servant, W. SHENSTONE.
Shall I beg a line from you, as soon as may be? -- I do, most earnestly.

I am given to understand that I may expect a visit this summer from the Bishop
of Worcester; from Lord Ward, Lord Coventry, and Lord Guernsey. -- It may be
so; but honors of this sort, which would formerly have affected me, perhaps
too deeply, have now lost much of their wonted poignancy. Can such persons bear
to see the scenes riant, and to find the owner gloomy? Let them, as they are
able, make my circumstances more affluent; and they shall find the reflection
in my face and in their reception; but, as this will never be, it is no
compliment to declare, that an hour or two's interview with you or Mr. Graves
outweighs the arrival of the whole British Peerage.

Something else I have to say. Young Pixell last winter told me, that the
organist of Worcester had set your Ode (The Blackbirds) to music; that he liked
the music; and that he would sing it next evening at the Birmingham concert. I
have not heard him mention it since, and I forgot to enquire; but, if you
happen to have the notes, I should be glad if you would enclose them for me.

I have been of late much bent upon the increase of horns in this
neighborhood. -- Do not interpret me perversely; I mean French horns only. My
Lord Dudley has had a person to teach two of his servants -- nothing -- at my
instigation; but your old acquaintance Maurice, who lives at the corner of my
coppice, will exceed him in a week by means of a good ear. I have borrowed a
horn for him. Adieu!



LXXXI. To C -- W --, Esquire
July 6, 1754. Dear Mr. W --,
YOU do me justice in believing that I am truly sorry you have not been well. A
degree or two of regularity more than what you have already will, I fancy,
restore your health, and my satisfaction; and I beg you will afford me the
earliest account of your recovery.

I considered Master W -- 's visit as an absolute engagement, and remained at
home in constant expectation of him for a fortnight together. -- I am, however,
not sorry, for his own sake, that he is gone to Oxford especially as you seem
to have an assurance of its proving advantageous. Pray assure him of my earnest
wishes for his happiness, and that The Leasowes will be always at his service,
whenever, through the fickleness of human nature, he thinks proper to give up a
Muse for a Water-nymph.

I expect Mr. Hylton daily. -- He was last week in London, and is now, I
believe, at Coventry. -- He will probably visit you before he comes into this
country. -- He talked of it when he left me. -- I am obliged to be brief.

Post-woman waits for me, "multa gemens." Dodsley is the man for your purpose.
-- He has, with good genius, a liberal turn of mind. -- I expect him to spend a
few days here every week. -- I will, if he return through Warwickshire,
occasion him to call upon you; but you know he is often lame with the gout, and
will hardly be able to make any long digression.

Your case is exactly mine. You say you cannot bear wrongs with patience, but
you can sleep and forget them. -- So can I -- so do I. -- Did I never tell you
(if not, I do so now) that indolence in a thousand instances, give one all the
advantages of philosophy? and pray, if you call me lazy any more, take care
that you do not use an expression by way of disparagement, which I consider as
the highest honor. I am a fool, however, for discovering my secret. What a
number of compliments might you have made me unwittingly!

Tacitus pasci si posset corvus, haberet
Plus dapis, and rixae minus invidiaeque.
Had I time, I could comfort you under your ill-usage, by discovering to you
the similitude of my own situation.

Excuse this scrawl; accept my compliments; carry them to Mrs. and Miss W --;
and believe me ever your obliged and most obedient humble servant,

W. SHENSTONE.

LXXII. To Mr. JAGO, on their contribution to Dodsley's Miscellanies.
The Leasowes, Jan. 22, 1755. Dear Mr. Jago,
I AM sure you must be puzzled how to account for my silence, after the honor
you have done me by your verses, and the request you made that I would write.
-- I am also as much at a loss how to give a proper weight to my apology. To
say I have been ill, would perhaps imply too much: when I would only allude to
that state of heaviness and dejection which is so frequently my lot at this
time of the year; and which renders me both averse to writing, and utterly
dissatisfied with every thing that I do write.

IF at any time my head grew a little less confused than ordinary, I was
obliged to devote my attention to the affair in which I had so foolishly
involved myself with Dodsley. You are unable to conceive what vexation it has
given me: I could not endure to disappoint him: of consequence, it has been my
lot to study the delicacies of poetry when my brain was not sufficient to
indite a piece of common prose; but as the Mouse (by which I mean my own
performances) will so soon make its ridiculous appearance, it were totally
impolitic in me to expatiate on the labors of the Mountain. -- The first
letter I received from you left me greatly dissatisfied. I was then to send D
-- my final instructions in a post or two. -- You took little notice of any
query I made; and intimated a disapprobation which agreed too well with my own
internal sentiments. I knew not but you were angry at the liberties I had
taken; though I could have suppressed any single paper which I had then
conveyed to London. -- Little did I then imagine that it was in my power to
have protracted the affair till now. Had that been the case, I should have
troubled you with repeated embassies; for I abhor the tediousness of the post,
and my servants do little at this time of the year, that is of more importance
than their master's poetry.

Your next letter convinced me, that you had taken no offense: and so far I was
happy; but then I wanted to have your Gold-finches as correct as your
Black-birds; there were some things I wished you to alter; and others in regard
to which I was desirous to speak my sentiments. Add to this my own verses, with
which I was infinitely more dissatisfied. Why then did I not write? -- The true
reason was, that I was pressed by D -- to send conclusions every post; and
though I have had all this leisure (as it happens) since you wrote, I never
could depend upon more than the space of a day or two. Besides, criticisms in
the way of letter are extremely tedious and dissatisfactory; insomuch, that I
am thoroughly determined never to print any thing for the future, unless I have
the company of my friends when I send to the press Hurried as I then was, I
sent up your two copies, and what I proposed for him of my own, with a kind of
discretionary power to select the best readings. How you would approve of this
measure I knew not; but I had this to plead in my behalf, that D -- was a
person of taste himself; that he had, as I imagined, many learned friends to
assist him; that his interest was concerned in the perfection of his
Miscellany; and that I submitted my own pieces to the same judgment.

After all, I am but indifferently satisfied with the present state of these
contributions. D -- writes just so much as he deems necessary in the way of
business, and passes by a thousand points in my letters which deserve an
answer. His last acquaints me, that he has spent a whole day in the arrangement
of what I have sent him; and that he purposes to send me proof-sheets before
the close of this week, desiring I would send them back by the return of the
post. Whether they arrive on Saturday or on Monday, I can keep them till the
Thursday following.

And this brings me, in the last place, to the main purpose of this letter. --
It is a request on which I lay great stress; and which you must not refuse me
upon almost any consideration. -- I beg, in short, that you would promise me
the favor of your company on Monday (or even Tuesday next, if possible; and
let us jointly fix the readings of your pieces, of my own, and those of our
common friends. -- You will immediately comprehend the expediency of this; now,
in particular, that our names are to appear. Some alterations I think necessary
in your Gold-finches, and there are two or three stanzas which I think you
might improve. -- Nevertheless, I will not pretend that this journey is so
requisite upon your own account as mine; and will recommend it upon no other
footing than the pleasure you will receive by the obligation which you will
confer.

I thought to have concluded here; but, as an envelope is now become altogether
necessary, have a temptation to proceed which I did not see before.

It is now become Friday the twenty-fourth of January. The packets I send, and
the request that I make upon so little warning, will, at first, astonish you.
-- Unforeseen interruptions would not suffer me to dispatch my courier sooner.
-- What then remains, but that I endeavor to adjust this affair agreeably to
its present circumstances?

You will readily conceive from what you observe in my packets, how desirable
your company is to me at this juncture. Supposing it then in your power to come
over on Monday, Tuesday, or even Wednesday, I am inclined to believe you will.
Supposing it not so, I can foresee you will not have leisure to satisfy my
queries by the return of the bearer; and what I would next propose is, that you
would either suffer me to send again to you betwixt this time and Thursday
next; or that you would yourself dispatch a purpose-messenger, and allow me to
pay for his journey. -- In either of these latter cases, I am sure you so well
know the nature of my present irresolution, that you will endeavor to afford
me all the assistance you are able.

Adieu! my dear friend! and depend upon my best services on every possible
occasion.

I am ever your most affectionate and most obedient servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LXXXIII. To the same, on the same Subject.
The Leasows, Feb. 22, 1755. Dear Mr. Jago,
I RECEIVED a letter from Dodsley, dated the fifteenth of February; informing
me that you were then in town, had been with him, and left your directions
whether he might send you a set of Miscellanies.

February the twentieth, and not before, arrived young H -- with your letter;
very obligingly intended to give me previous notice of your journey; but which,
by the iniquity of chance, tended only to acquaint me with an opportunity which
I had lost.

There is nothing could have been so fortunate as your journey to London, had
Mr. H -- thought proper to bring your letter in due time. -- What excuse he
made for his neglect, or whether he made any, I have really forgot. This I
know, that the whole affair has been unlucky. There has been abundant time for
consultation, and a perfect series of opportunities of which we have not been
suffered to avail ourselves. -- It is now three weeks or a month since I
corrected the proof-sheets; was so hurried in the doing of it that I scarce
knew what I wrote; and yet, in spite of all this hurry, the book is hitherto
unpublished. Now, indeed, it must be much too late for alterations, as D -- has
given me some room to expect a book this very day. -- I know but little what he
has done in consequence of that discretionary power with which I, through
haste, was obliged to entrust him: but in what I have done, myself, you may
expect to find all the effects of dullness precipitated.

It is now the twenty-third of February, and I have received no fresh account
of our friend Dodsley's proceedings; nor am I able to trace them, as I
expected, in the newspapers.

As to your share of this Miscellany, you can have no cause to be dissatisfied.
-- After what manner he has thought proper to print Lady L -- 's verses, I am a
good deal uncertain; but I apprehend he has not followed her own readings very
precisely, and that the blame thereof is to be thrown upon me. -- I am
concerned for the memory of my poor friend Whistler; and regret that his better
pieces did not fall into my hands. I think that Dodsley, however, would have
done him greater justice, had he inserted his translation of "Horace and
Lydia." It is true, the translations of that Ode are out of number; but his, if
I mistake not, had many beauties of its own. -- I do not know whether I ever
hinted to you, that his genius and that of Ovid were apparently congenial. --
Had he cultivated his with equal care, perhaps the similitude had been as
obvious as that of your twin-daughters. -- Mr. Graves has one small
well-polished gem in this collection; his verses upon medals. -- His little
conjugal Love-song is also natural and easy. -- I told you what I least
disliked of my own puerilities. -- If the printing of my Rural Inscriptions be
invidious, it was altogether owing to the instigation of Sir G -- L --. There
are four or five little matters, which, if he have printed with my name,
incorrect as they are, I shall be utterly disconsolate; at least, till I get
sight of a succeeding impression. -- For though I am not much solicitous about
a poetical reputation (and indeed it is of little importance to so domestic an
animal as myself), yet I could ill endure to pass for an affected, powerless
pretender.

And now no more upon the subject. -- I have nothing to add that can the least
amuse you. -- You, who have been conversant with all the busy and the splendid
scenes of life, can want no materials to make a letter entertaining. -- Indeed
you never did. -- I shall be glad, however, to receive a long one, upon what
subjects you please.

I have passed a very dull and unamusive winter; my health indeed rather better
than I experienced it last year; but my head as confused, and my spirits as
low. I live in hopes of an opportunity of seeing you at Harbury; but I begin
now to receive visits as an honest beggar does an alms, with my humblest thanks
for the favor, and with a despair of making a return.

Perhaps my next letter may discover somewhat more resolution: inclinations I
never want; being at all times with singular affection yours.

W. SHENSTONE.

LXXXIV. To the same.
The Leasowes, April 3, 1755. Dear Mr. Jago,
I HAVE so long expected the favor of a few lines from you, that I begin at
last to question whether you received the letter I sent you. It was enclosed in
one to Mr. M --, whom I requested to further it with all convenient expedition.
I am neither able to recollect the whole contents of it; nor indeed, if I were,
could I endure the thoughts of transcribing them. The chief intention of it,
however, was to acquaint you of Mr. H -- 's unhappy delay in the delivery of
that letter with which you favored me from Radway.

What confirms me in a suspicion that my last letter miscarried, is, that Mr.
Wren lately acquainted me of your being at Wroxall upon business, and of your
making some slight mention of Mr. Dodsley's publication, without intimating
that you discovered any design you had of writing to me. This is mere preamble
and stuff: implying nothing more than the desire I have to hear from you, when
it ought also to express how impatiently I long to see you. Worldly concerns
and my winterly state of health have detained me at home for these many months
past; worldly concerns may have confined you likewise; but as your health and
spirits are universally better than mine, and as you have much less dislike to
traveling than myself, I would hope that my absence from Harbury will never
cause you to neglect any opportunity of coming hither. For my own part, I have
been meditating upon a visit to you all this winter; and do, at this time,
resolve most strenuously to perform it before June. But the many such schemes
of pleasure in which I have been disappointed are a sort of check upon my
expressions, and make me promise with fear. As to Dodsley's performance, which
you must have received before this time, I will make no observations till I
have the pleasure of seeing you: and yet there are many points I would discuss,
and many accounts I want to give you. So many indeed, that they would furnish
out perhaps a superficial drawling letter; but would serve infinitely better
for conversation, with the book before us. The volume, I am told, is well
received in town; though political intelligence must engross much of its
present attention.

Mr. Hylton is in my neighborhood, and upon the point of settling at his farm.
Could you possibly spend a week with us, we would try to make it agreeable. At
all events, I beg to hear from you; and that, not merely as it will afford me
great pleasure, but as, at the same time, it will ease me of some solicitude. I
will not make this a long letter, though I wish to receive a long one in
return; having a head very little qualified to add any thing that may amuse
you, though a heart very sincerely and affectionately at your service.

W. SHENSTONE.

LXXXV. To the same.
The Leasowes, Dec. 14, 1756. Dear Mr. Jago,
THOUGH the silence that has prevailed for so long a time betwixt us be. I
fear, to be placed to my account, yet do I by no means imagine, that you will
desire me to fill half this letter with apologies. Suffice it, that I owe all
the world, at this time, either letters, visits, or money: yet that my heart is
as well disposed in each of these respects, as that of any one person who is
insolvent. The regard indeed that I owe to you has been a troublesome inmate
within my bosom for some time past; making daily remonstrances against the
injustice which I have done it; and urging me strenuously to take horse, and
make my personal apologies at Harbury. -- I return you many thanks for Mr. S --
's company, and for the sight of the manuscript which he showed me. Alas! that
I cannot spare money to drain and to improve my lands, or to put almost any
part of his excellent rules in execution! and yet that Mr. Child of Kinlett
(hearing my place always termed a farm) should come expecting to find all
things managed here according to the perfection of husbandry! As little can I
pretend to improve Mr. S -- 's treatise, as his treatise will my farm: no
farther at most, than in what regards the style, or plan of his performance.
Yet could I wish to see both it and him again before he prints it; wishing him
all the success which his very endeavor deserves. Assuredly the present is not
the time for his publication: more immediate remedies than can be derived from
agriculture are become absolutely requisite to relieve the sufferings of this
nation. -- I should be extremely well-pleased to visit you at Harbury, but
cannot even propose to myself that happiness at present; and were I even to
promise, have but too much reason to know the uncertainty of my performance.
Yet am I sensible enough we ought to meet, if we purpose that what we print
should have the advantage of our mutual criticisms. Let me then conjure you to
come over, at your convenience, for a few days, that we may agree at least upon
some general points, and make no worse a figure in the future Miscellany, than
we have done in the foregoing See the Edinburgh Review, No. 1.
. -- But I have really more things to say than I will pretend to scrawl upon
paper; nor can I endure to retail a few particulars, while I am impatient to
communicate the whole.

Let me acquaint you while I remember, that there is at this time a Mr.
Duncombe and his son, clergymen, that are publishing a new translation of
Horace. Whatever you may think of their success, after Francis, I believe I may
pronounce them men of real merit, and in no wise destitute of learning or
genius. They have requested me to communicate any version or imitation that I
can furnish, either of my own or of any friends; wherefore, it you have any
thing of this fort, I should be glad if you would put it in my power to oblige
them. The son has an "Ode to Health" in the fourth volume of Dodsley's
Miscellany.

Under the head of intelligence, I have mighty little to convey. -- The house
at Hagley, is, in a manner, finished, so far as concerns the shell; and wants
nothing, besides a portico to be as complete as most in England. -- pray
remember me to Mr. Talbot, Mr. Miller, and Mr. Holbeach; should they call upon
me next year, they will find my place better worth their notice.

I am, and have been ever, cordially and most affectionately,

Your most obedient servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LXXXVI. To Mr. GRAVES, with some Account of Politics and Poetry.
The Leasowes, April 4, 1755. Dear Mr. Graves,
YOU will be harrassed with my letters till you condemn my excessive leisure as
loudl^ as I have lamented that you should ever feel the want of it. Nor is it a
point so easily decided which of us may be the greater sufferer; you through my
officiousness, or I by your long silence. Yet the partiality which you have
ever shown me will, I think, dispose you to receive my letters more patiently
than it is in my power to sustain the loss of yours. After all, I should not
write at present, but that the Miscellanies, with which Dodsley compliments us,
arrived last week at the Leasowes. I desire therefore you would acquaint me,
whether the fe^t that he means for you should remain here till your arrival; or
if you choose that I should send it by the Birmingham-stage to Bath. Having made
this enquiry, I was thinking to conclude; but cannot reconcile myself to the
novelty of sending you three empty pages. The Parliament will rise too soon for
the publication of my "Rural Elegance;" and having performed my promise to
Dodsley, I think no more about such laurels as the public can bestow upon me,
but am giving all my attention to such as I can purchase of my nursery-man. I
wish, however, that the volume may recompense Dodsley for his trouble: I may
also add, for his ingenuity, and for his politeness in giving each of us a
complete set. They are elegantly bound, and all as much alike as possible.

The present crisis of state affairs does not seem to favor his publication,
as the attention of the public must lean greatly to that quarter. I saw a
letter from Sir William M -- (who corresponds with Lady Luxborough) which
placed the struggles of the ministry in a clearer light than they had yet
appeared to me. It seems that persons of all denominations are for carrying on
the war with vigor; and the King's application for a Vote of Credit was
received with general approbation. The zeal of the Parliament was indeed so
remarkable on this occasion, that, instead of the 600,000 l. at first intended,
it was thought proper to propose a million. But the services were ascertained,
and the Chancellor of the Exchequer made accountable for the application of it.
The augmentation of the fleet with 20,000 seamen; the raising 5000 marines on a
plan of dividing them into small companies, which will render them more useful
both by sea and land; the completion and reinforcement of the Irish regiments;
are the uses to which this million is to be appropriated. Mr. Fox and his
land-war party sat mute, whilst Mr. Leg with great openness and perspicuity
explained the present schemes; as they were calculated, to exert our whole
strength at sea, and, if possible, no where else. Mr. Dodington, who, it seems,
has not spoke for many years, charmed every body. His wit did not only
entertain, but animate and affect his hearers. "It were better, he said, than
lose the dominion of the Ocean, that the Ocean should overwhelm us: for what
Briton could wish to leave a posterity crawling upon this island, only to feel
the tyranny, and swell the victories, of France?" It seems, F --, in his
opposition to the Duke of Newcastle, is supported by the Duke of Cumberland,
his army, and the Scotch: that the ministry (or the D. of N -- 's party) seem
not displeased with a prospect of uniting with the Tories, who now hold the
balance; and it seems the Tories, by Sir William's letter, are as little
displeased to unite with the Ministry.

You will guess that good part of this political account is transcribed; and
you will guess aright. I had some thoughts that it might amuse you, and had no
occasion to use other expressions. -- Let me now, once more, return to the
futile objects of my own amusement. The impression upon this letter will be
taken from my new seal. The motto that I have pitched upon is, SUPEREST
MEMORIA: though I yet retain some hankering after the single word PRAETERITIS.
Probably this, however, is not the last seal that I shall cause this man to cut
in steel. The altar is not yet finished: ANTE OMNIA MUSAE; but it does not
quite satisfy me. -- I will enclose the two last letters I received from Mr.
Dodsley; but you must not think I build too much upon any compliment which he
there makes me. -- It is true, I think him a very sincere man; but he cannot
have been conversant so long with modern-writers, but he must conjecture, when
their piece is published, that they a little hunger for applause. I am now
uncertain whether you will receive a letter from him; as he has, unaccountably
I think, sent your books hither, and not to Bath. I am, however, fully
satisfied, that your first and last pieces, more especially, do credit to his
collection, and must please all persons of taste.

I desire my best respects to Mrs. Graves, who will be pleased to see the
affection that subsists betwixt you perpetuated. She will also feel some
satisfacton in the professions of friendship that are made you by your most
affectionate and faithful humble servant,

W. SHENSTONE.

LXXXVII. To the same, with a Recommendation of Mr. Dodsley to his Acquaintance.
From Mr. Baskerville's, Birmingham, July 27, 1756. Dear Mr. Graves,
IT were needless for me to recommend to you a person whom you so truly esteem
as Mr. Dodsley; and from whom you will gladly receive a visit, not more upon my
account, than upon his and your own. -- All I beg is, that, considering the
shortness of his time at Bath, you will be acquainted with him at first sight;
which, I think, should ever be a maxim with persons of genius and humanity. --
He has made a few days extremely agreeable to me at The Leasowes; has been
showing me his new Tragedy, which I wished you also might peruse. If I be not
unaccountably imposed upon by my friendship for the writer, the extraordinary
merit of this performance is altogether unquestionable. -- I will not inform
you through what hands it has passed in town; because I would have you
communicate your sentiments to him with entire freedom, being assured the
delicacy of them may yet be of service, and that the openness with which you
communicate them will be infinitely pleasing to Mr. Dodsley. He has done me the
honor to ask me for an epilogue: -- I wish, but fear to undertake it. --
Should any lucky hint occur to you, I well know how much you are able to manage
it to advantage. In that case, I would beg a line from you the first
opportunity. -- What talk I of a line from you, who am, at this very time, many
letters and apologies in your debt? but I cannot add many syllables to the
letter I am writing. -- I will write again in a few days. Mean time, my
compliments to Mrs. Graves; and remember that Mr. Dodsley and you become well
acquainted at first sight.

I am ever, dear Mr. Graves, Your most affectionate humble servant, W.
SHENSTONE.

LXXXVIII. To the same, on Mr. Dodsley and his Works.
The Leasowes, Mar. 7, 1757. Dear Mr. Graves,
I HAVE passed a very dull and unamusive winter here -- the worse, for being
neither disposed nor qualified to keep up a correspondence with my friends;
with you, among the chief; and yet, it is upon you that I must depend to make
up my deficiencies with Mr. Dodsley. -- The poor man has been afflicted with
the most lasting fit of the gout he ever underwent before. -- His patience, on
these occasions, is inimitable. His excursion to the Regions of Terror and Pity
is not the only instance of his ability to compose verses in the midst of pain.
When he sent me a copy of it, he let me know, that he had transmitted another
to you by the same post. I should be glad to receive your remarks upon it, ere
I communicate my own. I have, for some weeks past, sound my head so terribly
confused, that it has been with difficulty I could think or express myself on
the most superficial topic. I hope, in a little time, to be able to examine it
more attentively than I can at present: yet, in the mean while, must
acknowledge, that I think his subject capable of furnishing extraordinary
beauties for an Ode: and such, I think, he should call it; dropping the
narrative parts, and the connexions as much as possible. I cannot wish him to
print it without very material alterations; and what would occasion almost the
same trouble as it would require to new-write it. I do not mean this as a
condemnation of what he has already done; so much, as a proof of my opinion how
much he will he able to improve it. After all, it will scarce affect me half so
so much as his Tragedy. He is so honest a man, that the work he has to give the
world is much better than the specimen: or to borrow an idea from my situation,
the grain that he has to deliver will prove much better than the sample. It is
with shame I acknowledge I have not yet sent him his epilogue; and I feel the
greater compunction of mind upon this score, as it is possible he may impute my
neglect to Garrick's refusal of his play. This weighs nothing with you or me; a
thousand motives may affect a manager, that have little or nothing to do with
the merit of the performance; yet he may so far thank Mr. Garrick, that
whatever his refusal takes from the reputation of his Tragedy, it will, through
Dodsley's industry, add apparently to its value. I have not yet been able to
satisfy myself with every part of your epilogue, and must either omit sending
it at present, or must send him an imperfect copy. If you write to him, let me
beg you to give the most favorable account you can of me.

Somebody acquainted me (I think it was Mr. Talbot,) that your old friend
Ballard had bequeathed you his coins for a legacy. I was truly glad to hear it;
but have wondered since, that you never once informed me of so considerable an
acquisition.

I remember a poem of yours, called --, upon the present taste in gardening;
which you will not wonder if my late, employments make me wish once more to
see. Be so kind as to send me a copy of this, as well as of any other little
pieces that you have in your bureau. Some of yours deserve a better place than
what is assigned them in the Magazine. In particular, I remember that upon
Enigmas, and Mopsy. Be assured, I will make no use of any without your previous
consent. You know, I suppose, that Dodsley's other Miscellanies do not appear
before next winter. -- I have received from him, together with his Ode, a few
Elegies published by Mr. Whitehead. They are, I think, worth your perusal; and
designed by my worthy friend to excite my emulation. Alas! that I am so ill
able to deserve the encouragements which I receive from him!

My neighbor Baskerville, at the close of this month publishes his fine
edition of Virgil. It will, for type and paper, be a perfect curiosity. He
follows the Cambridge edition.

What think you of their management in regard to Mr. Byng? I cannot help
thinking the King should pardon him. The Court Martial, by acquitting him of
cowardice or disaffection, have left no motive for his negligence, beside an
error of his judgment; for we cannot impute it to supineness, indifference, or
inattention. And then to sentence a man for error, is to expect infallibility.
That twelfth article of war is most undoubtedly ill-expressed. -- Pray do not
forget my best respects to Mrs. Graves. -- Let me hear from you soon, and
believe me ever

Yours, W. SHENSTONE.

LXXXIX. On the same.
The Leasowes, April 8, 1757. Dear Mr. Graves,
WHAT remarks I had to make upon our friend Dodsley's Ode, I sent him the last
post. I would gladly have occasioned them to pass by Claverton; but, having
delayed them so long, I was impatient to convince him that I had not wholly
disregarded his request. They are indeed pretty copious; and yet I have
reserved to myself the privilege of re-criticising when I see his altered copy.
I recommended to him the addition which you proposed, and some others; and if
he will but take the pains that I have chalked out for him, I doubt not that he
will render it an excellent Ode, though he may not find it a very popular one.
I have also sent him a copy of our epilogue, not much different from what you
saw; to these I added my little Ode on Lady Luxborough's furnishing her
library, and Perry's Verses upon the Malvern-waters. At the close of these
last, there appears (with Perry's approbation,) a short address to Dr. Wall of
Worcester; a very eminent physician, and the patron of this mineral, who has
promoted a subscription in the county toward building, near this well, for the
accommodation of strangers.

I purpose also to give Dodsley the little Ode I enclose, and would beg the
favor of you to advise me concerning the additional stanzas' fix the readings
in the rest, and to return me the copy.

I come now to analyze your remark on Ballard's legacy; which is indeed very
ingenious, but will scarce bear examination: nor do I think that you rather
wish to have found that set of medals, than to have them given you by a
deceased friend. Assuredly, if we do not allow pleasure to be predominant in
this kind of melancholy, we destroy the foundation of all tragic or elegiac
writings. Melpomene has no place amongst the Muses; and the pains that we have
taken with our friend Dodsley's pensive Ode have been employed to no purpose.
But you want not these pedantic flourishes, and are wholly of my mind.

Martin's Magazine is, I believe, pretty obscure; and I wonder where you got a
sight of it. It was, however, fortunate enough for me that you gave no copy of
"James Dawson." I never yet saw your verses on that Grotto, or from Phaedrus,
and I want to see your W -- once more, concerning which you are silent. Your
"Pepper-box" and "Mopsy" might, I think, appear in Dodsley's Miscellany, either
with or without your name. I also want a copy of your verses upon Riddles; and
whenever you have a leisure hour, should be glad if you would look them out and
send them.

Go, and think yourself an happy man; at least, if your children be recovered,
as I am inclined to think they are; and give my service to Mrs. Graves, for the
happiness that she occasions you; of which I cannot but partake, being, with
constant and sincere affection, your most obliged humble servant.

W. SHENSTONE.

XC. On the same.
About 1757. Dear Mr. Graves,
DO you know my handwriting? -- It is really such a length of time since you
had demands upon me for letters, that I am hardly able to enumerate the several
causes of my neglect. This I know, that scarce a day has passed, during this
interval of silence, in which I have not remembered you with the most
affectionate esteem. -- I hope you correspond with our friend Dodsley; and that
it is not altogether disagreeaable to you, to find he is printing some of your
verses. He has many, alas! too many, of mine; which I suffered him to take away
in summer, and which the state of my winter health and spirits renders me but
ill able to revise. I believe, I am, even now, the principal cause that his two
volumes remain yet unpublished; nor can I express the pain it gives me, to be
thus detrimental to his interests; and to delay the publication of so much
better pieces than my own. I am also dissatisfied upon another score; I mean,
that I have been wanting to myself, in not asking the benefit of your advice;
which I have heretofore experienced to be at once so comfortable and so
advantageous; but although the scheme was projected in summer, the business of
correction was (by me at least) deferred till winter, and then I had neither
spirits to correct or to correspond.

I am really as much obliged to you for the pains which you took on my behalf
in London, as though the subject of your enquiry were a thing of more
importance to me; but, indeed, you can hardly conceive how indifferent I am now
grown, not only as to articles of that sort, but to aught that regards external
splendor.

I really have not time to enter upon the merits of inoculation; but am very
sure that Mrs. G -- 's danger was enough to influence your determination. I am
heartily glad to hear of her recovery; and can but look upon the weeks which I
purpose to pass some time hereafter with you at Claverton, as the most
agreeable of any that belong to the remainder of my life. I I am sensible, that
if I coveted to shine in poetry, I should lose no time in visiting public
places; but my wishes of that sort are most extremely limited; and I shall
visit you on the account of friendship; that is (past all doubt,) on a much
better principle.

I have long meant to write to you, and have accordingly given some answer to
most parts of your last letter. Nevertheless, the occasion of this present
letter is quite of another kind. -- A young painter of my acquaintance is
advised to to go to Bath; has a recommendation to the Bishop of B --, who will
introduce him to the Duke of N --. And though I cannot so easily bring him
acquainted with nobles or prime-ministers, I can give him directions to my
friend, who, in point of taste, is their superior. The person then, who, I
suppose, will be the bearer of this letter, has, by dint of mere ingenuity,
risen to a considerable eminence in fruit-pieces, etc. He has been employed by
Lord Lyttelton, and is much admired at Oxford; for my own part, I believe you
will think he is in few respects inferior to, and has (if I am not mistaken)
some advantages of, Stranover; but you will see his pieces. All I have to say
further on the occasion is, that he is a native of our parish, and a particular
friend of mine; and if it were in your power to promote his interest at Bath,
you would not only highly gratify me; but at the same time do a service to one
of the least assuming, most ingenious, and most amiable men I know. -- I beg my
best respects to your family, and am, dear Mr. Graves, most affectionately

Yours, W. SHENSTONE.

XCI. On the same.
The Leasowes, May 30, 1758. Dear Mr. Graves,
I THANK God, I have recovered a tolerable degree of health this spring; though
by no means free from so much heaviness and lassitude, as renders me averse to
all activity of body and mind. In the course of my disorder, so long as I could
bear to think of any sublunary enjoyment, I remembered my friends, and of
course thought much of you; but its advances were so precipitate, when I sent
for the physicians, that I soon received a wrench from every object of this
world; and it was by slow degrees, even after my recovery, that my mind took so
much root again, as appears necessary for its immediate support. I suppose you
have been informed that my fever was in great measure hypochondriacal; and left
my nerves so extremely sensible, that, even on no very interesting subject, I
could readily think myself into a vertigo: I had almost said an epilepsy; for
surely I was oftentimes near it. -- It became, therefore, expedient for my
recovery, to amuse myself with a succession of the most trivial objects I could
find; and this kind of carelessness I have indulged till it is grown into an
habit. Even letters to my friends are hardly consistent with my rule of health;
yet I could be no longer silent with regard to you, without feeling a sensation
that would hurt me more. This may fairly enough be termed the first letter I
have wrote since my recovery; wherein if I should tell you one half that I am
inclined to do, relating to this dreadful illness, what room should I then
leave to speak on any other subject? I must, therefore, tell these things by
word of mouth, or write them some other time. The journies which my friends,
and indeed physicians, propose for me, are what certainly bid fairest for the
completion of my cure: yet there are many, many things, which however unfit for
the task, I must endeavor to adjust before I can leave home, with any
possibility of enjoyment. Need I mention any other than my cursed embarrassment
with D --? who, during my danger, was induced to stop proceedings; but is now
beginning law afresh, and, by the removal of tenants from his share of the
Harborough estate, has now wriggled himself into possession of almost one half
of mine. However, I am not without hopes of seeing all terminated in a little
time; nor entirely without a prospect of seeing you at Claverton this summer.
That you may think this the more probable, I am pressed by two young gentlemen,
whom I very much esteem to accompany them on a visit to Mr. Bamfylde in
Somersetshire. These two gentlemen are Mr. Dean and Mr. Knight. Perhaps you may
have heard of Mr. Bamfylde, who is very much at Bath; is there now with his
lady, or has left the place but lately; and whose fortune, person, figure, and
accomplishments, can hardly leave him long unnoticed in any place where he
resides. Yet my visit to Estercomb must be of secondary consequence to me,
whilst you live by the road-side. I am much obliged to you for your compliment
on my Poematia in Dodsley's Miscellanies; which came very seasonably,
considering how I had been mortified by the first sight of what was done. To
speak the truth, there are many things appear there very contrary to my
intentions; but which I am more desirous may be attributed to the
unseasonableness of my fever, than to my friend D -- 's precipitation. My
purpose was to acknowledge as mine, none of the pieces which now follow the
longer Ode to Lady Luxborough. Her name was actually erased; as also my own at
the close of your Fable. The verses by Mrs. Bennet to Mr. Richardson were
absolutely new to me; were my name occurs again. All this is against me; as a
thing in itself invidious to have one's name recur so often, and as my own
lines contradict the merit which my friends so liberally allow me. -- The
verses of mine in the sixth volume (which was printed before the fifth) were
printed without my knowledge; and when I sent up an improved copy, it arrived a
good deal too late. As things happen, I am made to own several things of
inferior merit to those which I do not own -- All this is against me; but my
thoughts are avocated from this edition, and wholly fixed upon a future;
wherein, I hope, Dodsley will be prevailed upon to omit some things also from
other hands which discredit his collection: and, to balance all my discomforts
on this head, the world will know that I am esteemed by a person, whom I esteem
so much as you. -- I know not how it happens, but the taste for humorous poetry
does not prevail at this time: yet I cannot agree with Mr. J. Warton, that it
is no poetry at all, any more than that a good representation of Dutch boors is
not a picture. -- His brother, the Professor, is to be here with his pupil Lord
Donegal, etc. this summer. -- Mr. Spence and Mr. Dodsley will stay a day or two
here this month in their way to Scotland; and Mr. Home, the author of Douglas,
etc. called on me and we spent an evening together at Admiral Smith's. Thus my
ferme ornee procures me interviews with persons whom it might otherwise be my
wish, rather than my good fortune to see. Would to God, it could attract you,
whom I more long to see than any one! and let me tell you, there were
considerable additions made to it last year: Dodsley's present of Faunus; a new
Gothic-building, or rather a skreen, which cost ten pounds; and the ruins of a
Priory, which, however, make a tenant's house, that pays me tolerable poundage.
-- I am growing a little into your taste, why should not you advance farther
into mine? I mean, I have a love for medals, by means of some that have been
given me: yet do not think that I shall ever rival. you. -- My object is only
beauty, and I love only those of exquisite workmanship: so that this is no more
a rivalship than that of two persons who admire the sex, but love different
individuals; a rivalship, which, I trust, is more likely to cement our
friendship than disunite us; which it is my conviction and my comfort no sort
of rivalship will ever do. I have hardly room to express my good wishes for
long health and happiness to Mrs. Graves and your little family, and to
subscribe myself, my dear friend,

Your ever affectionate humble servant, W SHENSTONE.

XCII. On the same.
July 22, 1758. Dear Mr. Graves,
IT gives me great anxiety when I reflect how long I have waited for the
satisfaction of a line from you. I beg, if you are alive and well, you will let
me know so by the next post.

Mr. Dodsley and Mr. Spence have been here and stayed a week with me. The
former was in certain hopes of seeing you in town; but I do not find that he
either saw or heard from you, which adds to my anxiety.

I have seen few whom I liked so much, upon so little acquaintance, as Mr.
Spence; extremely polite, friendly, cheerful, and master of an infinite fund of
subjects for agreeable conversation. Had my affairs permitted me, they had
certainly drawn me with them into Scotland; whither they are gone, for about a
month, upon a journey of curiosity.

I believe it will give you pleasure to hear that my lawsuit with D -- is
accommodated, by the generous interposition of my Lord Stamford; concerning
whose benevolence and magnanimity it is impossible for me to speak in the terms
which they deserve. It is ended, I hope, not very disadvantageously for me;
apparently with one advantage, of being entirely exculpated in the opinion of
all mankind. The common method (as M. Bruyere observes) is to condemn both on
these occasions. -- This suits people's indolence, and favors their
impartiality. -- And though the equitableness of my whole conduct in this
affair was self-evident to all that were near me, yet I found many that were
inclined to blame us both, and some that I could never convince till now that
the fault was not wholly mine.

Your "Pepper-box and Salt-seller" are in one of the Chronicles. -- They
pillage Dodsley's two last volumes of all that is worth perusal. -- I surely
have some friend amongst the writers of the Monthly Review; for I have not only
escaped a flogging, but am treated with great civility.

I never know how to leave off, when I begin writing to you, having always a
great deal to say. I only purposed you a few lines, to desire you would write
directly. Pray make my best compliments to Mrs. Graves, and believe me ever
yours most invariably.

W. SHENSTONE.

XCIII. To the same, containing an Account of his Excursions and Amusements.
The Leasowes, Nov. 25, 1758. Dear Mr. Graves,
I HAVE had daily expectations of a line from you these two months; conscious,
however, that I did not deserve any; and affording a manifest instance of of
the infatuations of self-love. The last letter that I received of yours is
dated the close of July, since which time I have been chiefly engaged in my
customary amusements; embellishing my farm, and receiving the company that came
to see it. My principal excursions have been to Enville, on Lord Grey's
birthday; to Lord Ward's, upon another invitation; and to the Worcester
Music-meeting. I need not mention what an appearance there was of company at
Worcester; dazzling enough, you may suppose, to a person who, like me, has not
seen a public place these ten years. Yet I made a shift to enjoy the splendor,
as well as the music that was prepared for us. I presume, nothing in the way of
harmony can passibly go further than the Oratoria of The Messiah. It seems the
best composer's best composition. Yet I fancied I could observe some parts in
it, wherein Handel's judgment failed him; where the music was not equal, or was
even opposite, to what the words required. Very many of the noblesse, whom I
had seen at The Leasowes, were as complaisant to me as possible; whereas it was
my former fate, in public places, to be as little regarded as a journeyman
shoemaker. -- There I first saw our present Bishop; also our late Bishop's
monument, which is fine. -- Lastly, there I first saw my Lady Coventry; to
whom, I believe, one must allow all that the world allows in point of beauty.
-- She is certainly the most unexceptionable figure of a woman I ever saw; and
made most of the ladies there seem of almost another species. On the whole, I
was not a little pleased that I had made this excursion; and returned with
double relish to the enjoyment of my farm. It is now high time to take some
notice of your obliging letter. -- I think I was not told the purport of the
journey you made to London; so can only say, I am very sorry for the
aggravating circumstances of your disappointment; and hope, long before this
time, that Mrs. Graves is quite recovered. -- Did I forget to make your excuses
to Dodsley or no? -- he was here (as I remember) soon after, with Mr. Spence,
in their way to Scotland. -- Mr. Spence, the man you would like, and who would
like you of all mankind. He took my Elegies into Scotland, and sent them back
on his return, with a sheet or two of criticisms, and an handsome letter. --
How much am I interested in the preservation of his friendship; -- and yet such
is my destiny (for I can give it no other name.) I have never wrote to him
since. This impartiality of my neglect, you must accept yourself as some
apology: but to proceed; Mr. Spence chose himself an oak here for a seat, which
I have inscribed to him, (SPENCE'S OAK.) Subintellige SEDEM ISTAM (hanc.)
VELLET.

I absolutely forgot to talk to Dodsley about your --, and I am vexed; because
I could, with a safe conscience, have raised his idea of your abilities. --
However, it is not too late, even if you care to publish it this winter -- His
play comes on (I fancy, this very night) at Covent Garden. What he says in
behalf of this step is, that there was no glimpse of probability, that Garrick
would ever admit it at the other house He says, the players liked it, and
seemed inclined to take (...)
. -- Mrs. Bellamy is his Cleone, and speaks the epilogue, of which more anon. I
suppose he acts by Lord Chesterfield's opinion: for I know, when he was going
to print it (since he came home) with a proper dedication to Mr. Garrick, my
Lord then prevented him, telling him, it would be acted one day or other. --
Did I ever send you a copy of the epilogue, with all the additions and
alterations? Dodsley first liked, then disliked it, and lastly liked it again;
only desiring me to soften the satire, shorten the whole (for it was upwards of
sixty lines,) and add a complimentary close to the boxes. -- All this I have
endeavored, and sent it him last Monday. -- You would not care to own it: and
he would fain have me; but I think neither of us should run the risque, where
so little honor is to be acquired; yet Mr. Melmoth's name to the prologue is
an inducement. -- I was very near surprising you at Claverton this autumn, with
my friend young Knight, in his way to Mr. Bamfylde's; but he goes again in
spring, and I shall certainly accompany him; I have bespoke, but not yet
procured any, horses for my chaise. It is a neat one, you will find; and I have
made two or three excursions in it. -- I saw Mr. Patchen's Topographical
Letters soon after they were published. -- It you continue to me the honor of
a shield in your Gothic alcove, the field should be either "Or, three
King-fishers proper," or with the addition of a chief gules, three trefoils
argent -- no bar, cheveron bend, etc. -- More of this when I write again. --
Motto FLVMNINA AMEM, SYLVASQUE INGLORIVS -- RVRA MIHI.

I cannot recollect my company of the season, to tell it you. -- Sir Francis
Dashwood, Lord Litchfield, and Mr. Sheldon, were here together in the beginning
of the autumn; and I have strong invitations to visit them. -- I have a very
genteel letter from Sir Francis, offering me goldfishes; and I have a double
inducement to visit Mr. Sheldon, as he lives near Mickleton, and is the most
agreeable man alive. -- Your acquaintance Lord W -- dined and spent good part
of a day with me. -- Under a sort of gloomy appearance, a man of admirable
sense and some humor. -- I put him in mind of you, and the remarkable monument
at Cambden. -- Mr. Thomas Warton was also here with Lord Donegal, and has since
sent me his "Inscriptions," which are rather too simple, even for my taste. --
Bishop of Worcester with his family and company -- Lord Willoughby -- Lord
Foley. -- I mention Lord Foley the rather, because I shall call on your friend
Dr. Charleton (who was also here) to pass a day or two with me at Whitley. -- I
shall pass also a day or two at our Bishop's, whom I met since at Enville.
These two ( propose what I will besides) will probably be the principal, or
only excursions that I shall make this winter. -- God send it may no more
affect my health than it has hitherto done. -- I am at present tolerably well,
and live more temperately than before. -- Would to God you could come over; go
with me to Dr. Charleton's, and Lord Foley's, and Lord Stamford's, and pass a
week here! I would meet you with my chaise at Worcester, or even farther. I
have finished a building opposite to the new stable, which I think you saw. --
They together give my house a degree of splendor. Did you see my priory? -- a
tenant's house, one room whereof is to have Gothic shields round the cornice.
-- I am in some doubt whether to make it an House of Lords or House of Commons;
if the former, my private friends will have shields round my Gothic
bed-chrmber. -- The wretch is cursed that begins a letter with no better a pen
than I finish one with. My dear friend, write directly a long letter. -- Keep
me alive in the memory of Mr. Graves, and believe me ever yours most
affectionately,

W. SHENSTONE.

XCIV. To the same, in Expectation of a Visit.
Christmas, 1758. Dear Mr. Graves,
THERE can be nothing more welcome to me than the intelligence which you give
of your intended visit at The Leasowes. God knows how few of these interviews
may for the future be allotted to us; and I should be glad at least to testify
the joy which they afford me, by meeting you at Birmingham, or elsewhere within
one day's journey for my chaise -- Pray be so good as to give me one more
letter before you set out. -- Very glad should I be to pay my respects to your
brother at Mickleton, for whom I have the truest respect; but dare not give
encouragement, for fear that aught should interfere. -- I have ten thousand
things to say to you; but will defer them, I think, all. I am positive your --
may be made advantageous to you by means of Dodsley; and even reputable, if you
so please. -- Will not Mrs. G -- accompany you? pray convince her of my sincere
regard.

I want to congratulate you on your escape from the smallpox, in a manner
different from your ordinary acquaintance; yet am not able to express my
sentiments -- guess the rest; knowing, and sufficiently knowing that I am, with
constancy and ardour, your most affectionate friend,

W. SHENSTONE.

XCV. To Mr. JAGO.
The Leasowes. Jan. 6, 1759. Dear Mr. Jago,
IF you knew the maxims on which I conduct myself, you might call me perhaps
unpolite; but, I think, by no means unfriendly; I mean with respect to the
ordinary congratulations on your marriage. Were you and I less intimate, less
experienced, and less assured friends, it had been no venial omission to have
neglected such a ceremony. Perhaps I should not have neglected it; but as I
have the satisfaction of believing that you would rejoice in any success of
mine, so I hope you would not distrust my sentiments upon any change of your
condition which you yourself esteemed for the better. I do indeed, my worthy
friend, wish you much joy, both now, and at all times; and you will ever
discern it in my face, as often as fortune grants us an interview. -- Mr. S --
is a benevolent man, and I am sure would withold no information that tended
to illustrate our friendship on either side.

I have thoughts of proceeding on to Harbury, whenever I come to Mr. Wren's: as
I have long enough made my friend a promise; and intend ere long to do. Many
reasons occur why I cannot set forward tomorrow morning: are these reasons
substantial, or no other than the sly and sophistical insinuations of
indolence? -- surely the former.

Dodsley, and indeed Mr. Spence, both expect me in town this February. -- I
fear it will not be; but if it should, how readily would I give notice, and
become obliged to you for your company.

Though I should have expected you would select a partner whose society you
could enjoy, yet I was not a little satisfied with the hint given me in your
letter, as well as in one I had before received from Mr. S --. It is not for
such ladies as you and I esteem, that Mrs. See Epilogue to Cleone.
Bellamy's extraordinary lecture was intended; and a lecture it would have been
with a vengeance, had not D -- omitted some thirty lines, and substituted about
twelve or fourteen of his own. However, he is now going to print his fourth
edition of it; in which the original epilogue will be restored, as well as
considerable improvements introduced into his play. He sold two thousand of his
first edition, the very first day he published it.

I have so much to tell you, and of so various kinds that I am afraid to
expatiate upon any one article. Cannot you make a shift to call upon me, before
my public life arrives? -- I would send my chaise to meet you at any place you
should appoint.

I have passed my winter hitherto pretty cheerfully amongst my books, in what I
call my library. It now better deserves that name, by the form I have given it,
and the volumes I have added. -- Mr. S -- would tell you something of my other
occupations.

I could wish that you would favor me with a copy of your Essay on
Electricity, and with any new copy of verses of your own, or of your friends.
-- Be not apprehensive: there shall nothing more appear in print of your
composition, without your explicit consent. -- And yet I have thoughts of
amusing myself with the publication of a small Miscellany from neighbor
Baskerville's press, if I can save myself harmless as to expense. -- I purpose
it no larger than a "Lansdown's," a "Philips's," or a "Pomfret's Poems."

Have you read my friend Dr. Grainger's Tibullus? -- It affords you an elegant
edition of a good translation and of the text. He is engaged in a war with S
--, and has just sent me his pamphlet; which I could wish you to read, in order
to form a judgment of S -- 's character. Spence, I see, has advertised his
"Parallel betwixt Malliabecqui and his Tailor." It is merely a charitable
design: and such are now all Spence's views.

What remains of my paper must be employed not in mere ceremony, although in
something that bears the form of it: in my best compliments to Mrs. Jago, and
my offer, not indeed of a part of the friendship which I owe you, but rather of
an equal quantity: in an assurance of the cordiality with which I shall rejoice
to see both her and you; and in confirmation of that affection with which I
have ever been, and am, my good friend, your mos obedient servant,

W. SHENSTONE.

XCVI. To Mr. GRAVES, on their several Situations and Compositions.
The Leasowes, April 18, 1759. Dear Mr. Graves,
YOU will think my silence long; and I should be sorry to have you quite
regardless of it; although, I fear, it must be my fate to trespass frequently
upon your kind solicitude. -- I have no excuse to make, besides some frivolous
avocations, and much of that heaviness and lassitude which disinclines one to
write letters. -- I passed the former part of winter with more vivacity than I
did the latter, or even the incipient spring; owing, possibly, to these cold
winds, which will not permit me to use my wonted exercise. You will laugh at
the word vivacity, when applied to so dull an animal; but I speak comparatively
of that unmeaning drowsiness which is my lot at other times, and was, in some
sort, while you were here.

Mr. Dodsley tells me, he received a letter from you, acquainting him that
Cleone would be played at Bath: I should be glad to receive from you any
particulars of its success. He is publishing an elegant edition of it, which I
expect by this very post. The new plate of my grove, which will appear at the
end of his Melpomene, is perhaps liable to some exceptions; but, by much, the
best that has yet appeared. Do not forget to send me your objections to it. As
to the epilogue, I have totally banished, I think, every one of the lines which
he substituted; have left to him the choice of two or three readings for the
four last lines; and though none of them quite please me, yet the epilogue, on
the whole, discovers more of genius, is more spirited, and less inaccurate. I
shall be glad to find that you think the same with me.

In regard to your place, so far as I can form an idea of it, I would have you
consult self-amusement; I mean, without too much regard to what others say or
think. As to distinguishing your ingenuity (which I unfeignedly desire you may)
the press affords you more adequate materials than either your fortune or,
perhaps, your place. Do not imagine, however, that I shall not be much
delighted with every stroke I trace of yours at Claverton. My faculties are
very strongly intuitive in respect of every thing belonging to you: and I
should be ashamed if any nook or angle that you had rounded; any wall that you
had ruinated; any stream that you had diverted; or any single shrub that you
had planted; should elude my discovery: yet you will shine more by means of the
press; and if I said any thing concerning your --, that did not encourage you
to perfect it, I am sure, I must use terms very inexpressive of my meaning.
Without any more words, let me entreat you to proceed with it; give a full
scope to your imagination; and if there should be aught one would wish
retrenched, it is mighty easily done.

I have indeed thoughts (for I never use the word resolutions) of publishing my
Elegies next winter; -- you will gainsay, when I tell you my intention of
publishing also my very farm; at least, about eight or ten scenes taken from
it, by way of topand tail-pieces for those elegies. -- The world will perhaps
tax my vanity; but I do not in the least care. -- The pleasure which that world
gives me, I am very conscious, will not be too high; and I am determined that
the pain it may seek to give shall bear proportion: yet should I be sorry to
obtrude stuff upon it, either from the pencil or the pen; and my good friend
Mr. Dodsley has sometimes pained me, not a little.

I tell you, you cannot allow for winter. -- That very scene near Priory-gate
shows not a bit of road in summer; though the consciousness of a firm rail
there would add to my own tranquillity -- Mr. Knight has given me Strange's
prints, which, I hear, are fine. Dodsley gives me swans; but for these two
months past I have been a librarian, or rather a bookbinder; yet nothing more
unfeignedly, than yours and Mrs. Graves's most affectionate humble servant,

W. SHENSTONE.

XCVII. To the same, on Fables, Mottoes, Urns, Inscriptions, etc.
The Leasowes, Oct. 3, 1759. Dear Mr. Graves,
DEPEND upon it, I shall see Claverton before winter. -- The mischief is, that,
with as violent a propensity as ever person felt, I shall not be able to reach
your hemisphere, while Mr. Spence, Mr. Dodsley, and Mr. Whitehead give it such
peculiar luster, in my eyes. This I did not despair of doing at the time Mr.
Dodsley left me at Birmingham. It turned upon an event, which I did not indeed
explain to him, the accommodation of the affair with D --; which concerns near
one half of my little fortune, and which, if I have any luck on my side, must
now be perfected within a fortnight. I was shown the rough sketch of our
conveyances last Saturday. -- Once for all, my indolence is not in fault; my
health and my worldly embarrassments have often been so, and at present are.
"Pol me miserum, patron, vocares, si verum, etc."

Dodsley, to give his book eclat, should allow himself time to abridge and
polish. It is not enough in my opinion, merely to surpass L'Estrange and
Croxall. The grand exception to Fables consists in giving speech to animals,
etc. a greater violation of truth than appears in any other kind of writing!
This objection is insurmountable. Their peculiar advantage is to remove the
offensiveness of advice; in order to which, one should perhaps pursue a medium
betwixt the superfluous garniture of La Fontaine, etc. and the naked simplicity
and laconism of Phaedrus. In respect of his own new-invented Fables, I wish him
to devise uncommon subjects, and to inculcate refined morals. But pray send me
your two directly, which will answer all that I expect in Fables.

Did Mr. Dodsley tell you of the seat in my shrubbery which I had taken the
freedom to inscribe to you? I could not satisfy myself in an inscription; and,
from a kind of spleen and aversion to delay, made use of the shortest that I
could devise. The seat and scroll are elegant. The inscription, only, AMICITIAE
ET MERITIS

I will not be so affected as to pretend that the much greater compliment you
design me is more offensive to my modesty than it is pleasing to my friendship.
I wish however it could be a little shortened. The "inter hortensis elegantiae
studiosos" seems a little too verbose for inscription. Beside, I had rather the
compliment were not thrown with so much emphasis upon any skill I have in
gardening; but in some sort divided betwixt that and poetry, if you perceive no
great objection; suppose, AMICITIAE G. S. or, AMICITIAE G. S. AMICITIAE G. S.
or, CVIVS VOTIS A motto, (FORTVNATVS ET ILLE, DEOS QVI NOVIT AGRESTES)
PANAQVF, SILVANVMQVF, SENEM, NYMPHASQVE SORORES.
VIRG. "Illustravit" seems an happy word here, if it do not say our too much of
nobility: villa, I presume, implies no more than a country mansion house. --
But I leave the whole to your discretion.

Now you speak of our Arcadias, pray, did you ever see a print or drawing of
Poussin's Arcadia? The idea of it is so very pleasing to me, that I had no
peace till I had used the inscription on one side of Miss Dolman's urn, "Et in
Arcadia Ego." Mr. Anson has the two shepherds with the monument and inscription
in alto relievo at Shugborough. -- Mr. Dodsley will borrow me a drawing of it
from Mr. Spence. See it described, vol. 1. page 53. of the Abbe du Bos. sur la
poesy et la peinture.

Tell Mr. Dodsley, if he be yet at Bath, that Mr. Cambridge called and dined
with me; answering precisely to the idea which I had conceived of him from Mr.
D -- 's account. -- I wish to God he may have brought you acquainted with Mr.
Spence; to whom you are, in my estimation, the most like of any one I know. Is
Mr. Spence yet at Bath? Mr. D -- is gone, or going. Either he or the former
told me that On the Prince's asking Pope, how he could be glad to see him, when
he expressed so much contempt of Kings, Pope answered. "Though he did not like
old Lions, he loved the young ones before their claws grew."
anecdote of Pope and the Prince of Wales long ago. Pray read Madame De
Sevigne's Letters; -- they have amused me much of late. I hope, within a post,
to send you a neat plan of my farm, etc. the same to Mr. Spence by your means,
if he be at Bath. Do you hear who is to be Bishop of Worcester? Give me the
earliest intelligence you can gather. -- The late Bishop visited me last year;
and intended, I hear, to have done so this. I wish we may have another as
obliging and polite as I always found his late Lordship.

I want to enclose some little engravings, etc. to you, but must wait till I
can get a frank. Write directly, for this once, I beg you, though you prove
dilatory another time. Of all books whatever, read Burke (second edit.) "Of the
Sublime and Beautiful;" and of all points whatever, believe that I am, with my
best good wishes to Mrs. Graves, dear Sir, ever your most affectionate and
invariable friend,

W. SHENSTONE.
"DI MEMORIA NVDRISSI PIV QVE DI SPEME." How do you like this motto for an urn?

My best compliments to Mr. Spence and Mr. Dodsley, if at Bath. I will write
soon to each of them -- your garden is as pretty as you can make it.



XCVIII. To the same.
The Leasowes, Oct. 26, 1759. Dear Mr. Graves,
I WANT no conviction of the pleasure which you will receive from the
termination of my infernal lawsuit. It must, if I have any luck, be finally
adjusted in about nine days time; after having robbed me of my peace for six of
the best years of my life. During the former part of life, I languished for an
acquaintance somewhat more extensive; and when the company that flocked to see
my place removed all grounds of that complaint, this accursed dispute arose,
and mixed with every enjoyment that was offered me. -- I have sometimes found
entertainment in balancing the good and evil that has been allotted me in
general; and have in the end imagined the good prevalent, and that I have great
reason to be thankful for more happiness than I deserve. -- Yet are there many
awkward circumstances that forbid the scale to fall precipitately; among the
chief, I place the distance to which I see you and one or two others removed.
This is indeed an heavy article, and, were it not for letters, would be
insupportable.

As to Mr. Dodsley's collection of Fables, you are mistaken if you think that I
perused the quarto book. I dipped into it here and there, and thought there
wanted much alteration. There was a little book with a paper-cover, on which I
bestowed no small pains; and when I had so done, crossed the Fables which I
thought might well enough pass muster. Addison would have been the best writer
of Fables of any author I know -- the purity of style -- the conciseness -- the
dry humor -- and the familiar manner. -- As to Dodsley's publishing this
winter, he may possibly do so, without loss of credit; but when one considers
that they are, or ought to be, the standard for years to come, one can hardly
avoid wishing him to give them the polish of another summer. 'Twas fortunate
that you pitched upon "The Raven and Magpie" to transcribe for me; as Mr.
Dodsley had sent me "The Sun-flower and the Tuberose" before. I think the last
somewhat inferior, but will re-consider it before I write again. The Fable
which I literally translated from Phaedrus was "The Wolf and the Crane," in
order to give Dodsley an idea on what Rollin laid the stress in Fables.

As to the inscription, I will endeavor to adjust it to your mind --
"Meritisque reconditioribus" may do, but is not explicit enough. I want fully
to express a character that shines remarkably among select acquaintance, and
yet (through extreme refinement) makes less figure in the public eye.

I had made the same objection to Burke's chapter upon words -- and yet there
seems to be something right in it. Du Bos (which I have only seen in French,
but which I believe is also translated) consists of three volumes, 12mo. His
subjects are pleasing, and his knowledge may be entertaining; but his genius
seems not very profound, from the little that I have consulted in him.

Dodsley is precisely what you say of him; an object of esteem and love, and in
some degree of admiration. His ear does not wholly please me in writing, and
yet he is intimately affected with music. -- Lord L -- 's ear is perhaps the
reverse. I mean, he does not much regard music, yet writes harmoniously in
verse and prose.

Robertson I think to buy -- Butler also, though I shall not admire him -- Lord
Clarendon, when I am rich -- Rasselas has a few refined sentiments thinly
scattered, but is upon the whole below Mr. J --. Did I tell you I had a letter
from Johnson, enclosing Vernon's Parish-clerk? Pray take Dodsley's advice in
regard to your --; and heighten the ridiculousness of your hero, which his
kind of lunacy will countenance, yet admit him to say good things. -- But do
not make any alteration in the narrative of your own story -- at least, till I
have again perused it -- Do not spurn this fifty pounds. It will procure you
numerous conveniences, which you would perhaps otherwise deny yourself.

I have passed four or five days, betwixt this week and last, at my Lord Ward's
at Hinley. -- This has furnished me with franks, beside the consolation I
derive from having paid a visit of this kind. It is "spinis e pluribus una
saltem exempta." The restraint renders them spinae. I hope I may say so without
umbrage, or giving an appearance of disrespect. For Mr. W -- is an agreeable
man, and my reception was very polite.

I have three or four more of these superb visits to make, and which I may not
omit without giving real offense. To Lord Plymouth, next week; Lord Stamford's,
the week after; then to Lord Lyttelton, at our Admiral's; and then to Lord
Foley, if your friend Dr. Charleton will accompany me; then, etc. alas! alas!
"Quid me exempta juvat spina?" I must conclude upon a separate paper. That your
expectation may not deceive you in regard to the plan I promised, I enclose a
survey of my farm reduced to miniature by a neighboring artist. Let me know if
it bring the place to your memory -- I think to have a plate (which may be done
at Birmingham for six or eight shillings) that shall leave me no trouble but to
tinge the impressions with colors; in order to give my friends. But do you
advise me to engrave this, or another that is twice as large?

I have purchased "Gerard upon Taste," the author of which is a Professor at
Edinburgh, and the book commended in the Review -- you will say that the
Reviewers are partial to Scotch-people -- I know nothing of that, but the book
is learned, and on a pleasing subject -- I may perhaps add a ver important one
-- for surely it is altogether unquestionable that taste naturally leads to
virtue. I am however in some doubt whether it will give you that amusement
which Burke's has done. -- I must now take my leave, having engagements of a
different kind; but not till I have desired my hearty respects to Mrs. Graves,
and her acceptance of this "Grove and King-fisher." I am, dear Mr. Graves, ever
and most entirely, your very affectionate,

W. SHENSTONE.

XCIX. To the same, on his Want of Leisure.
The Leasowes, Nov. 24, 1759. Dear Mr. Graves,
THOUGH I write to you again so soon, yet it really grieves me to hear the
complaint which you so often make for want of time. I, who have time to waste
by lustres, cannot have patience with the world, that suffers you to want the
leisure which you would employ to so much better purposes. Perhaps however, you
are as happy as more leisure could make you; the case is not so clear, as to
leave me satisfied of the contrary. And yet, as the pleasures of imagination
have an undoubted claim to a real existence, they must surely afford very
lively sensations to persons of your sensibility and refinement. -- Be this as
it may, I will always murmur, that you can so ill spare time for literary
amusement. -- Nevertheless, make one effort, and finish the task you have now
before you. I must confess, you may naturally reply, that I am now become an
interested person; but this, I am sure, will be no check to your activity.

Mr. William Duncombe sent (with the first volume of Horace) one of the satires
in Ms. inscribed to me. Upon purchasing, however, the second volume, I find my
name is changed to Hawkesworth. -- Who knows but I lost this compliment by
writing to you, my friend, while I should have been writing to him? -- if so,
indeed, you ought to make it up to me; and I am sure I shall prize your
compliment beyond that of which I have been deprived.

The view of B --, which you mention, I have indeed seen a long time ago; but
surely the water-fall is quite detestable. There is something on each side, as
I remember, that puts one in mind of a porridge-pot boiling over beneath the
pot-lid. The appearance of the house and the back-ground is better; this was
adjusted by the painter; the other (as I think Smith told me) by an old
house-steward of Lord T -- 's.

I have enclosed another copy of the lines to Venus, for your emendation. --
Thank you for the stanza you introduced. -- I meant, indeed, before, to allude
to natural beauty more than moral; but did not fully enough express myself.
There remains no transition now but from animal beauty to inanimate; which is
easier.

You will observe, that I take great liberties with the Fables you ask me to
revise. -- Dodsley must think me very fantastical or worse, while I was
correcting those he wrote at The Leasowes. -- I find my ear much more apt to
take offense than most other people's; and, as his is far less delicate than
mine, he must of course believe, in many places, that I altered merely for
alteration's sake. I cannot be easy without some certain proportion betwixt one
sentence and another; betwixt one member of a sentence and another; without a
melody at the close of a paragraph almost as agreeable as your "magnificent
salon."

I have not written to Dodsley any decent letter since he arrived at his house
in London. -- I must now apply myself to write half a score Fables, and, if he
chooses it, a translation of La Motte's Discourse upon the subject. -- Your
reply in regard to the delay of my publication cannot be answered; that is
certain.

Whitefield's Journal, I fear, is purged of its most ridiculous passages. --
Dodsley brought one down hither for Mr. Deane to show my Lord D -- th; but he
tells me, there remains nothing of that gross absurdity which I saw in your
brother's at Mickleton.

The painter whom I just mentioned to have taken some portraits through my
recommendation, and to have painted a ruin for my greenroom, offers to give me
my picture if I choose to sit. -- Were you here to lend me your assistance, I
should certainly comply. -- Mean while, tell me what you think of some of the
attitudes that I enclose. What I myself prefer at present is, to lessen my
dimensions (which of itself gives a kind of beauty) and to appear in a kind of
nightgown agreeable to the attitude marked AA. The man evidently hits off
likenesses, and is esteemed to shine among the painters of Birmingham. I shall
be forced to have you picture copied by him, which, by means of dampness, flies
off the canvas; so that, on the whole, I shall re pay his compliment. -- This
last article puts me in mind that I owe you my picture, whenever you demand it;
but I would choose to defer it till the spring, for some certain reasons
regarding economy. Remember me always to good Mrs. --; and believe me yours,
with all possible affection,

W. SHENSTONE.

C. To the same, with an Account of a Design for his own Picture.
The Leasowes, Jan. 8, 1760. Dear Mr. Graves,
WERE I to regulate my compliments by the arrival of times and seasons, I
should congratulate you upon a correspondence which now enters upon its three
and twentieth year. -- Our frienship is of something older date; and is not
this an achievement that deserves the honor of a triumph both for you and me
too? -- More, I am sure, than the regular destruction of fifteen or twenty
thousand wretches in the field; considering how uncommon we find friendships of
so long a duration, and how cheap we find such victories, not only on the
Prussian, but on the Austrian side.

Mr. Cambridge (Scriblerus) who called here this autumn, was considering this
massacre rather in a philosophical than political view; and, indeed, it does
not appear to me that plague, earthquake, or famine, are more pernicious to the
human race, than what the world calls Heroes; but enough of this.

Your want of leisure gives me pain; surely, if I may guess by one or two of
your last letters, you have enlarged the number of your scholars, and extended
your domestic cares, beyond what your circumstances require.

You must not judge of my painter's abilities by the small sketch I enclose. --
I desired him to give me a slight one; and have, perhaps, ruined even that by
endeavoring to bring it nearer to what the picture now is myself. It will give
you a tolerable idea in the most points, except the Pan, which has his face
turned toward the front; and is not near so considerable. -- I chose to have
this term introduced, not only as he carries my favorite reeds, but as he is
the principal sylvan deity. -- The Water-nymph below has the word "Stour" on
the mouth of her urn; which in some sort, rises at The Leasowes. On the scroll
is, "Flumina amem sylvasque inglorius" alluding to them both. -- The Pan, you
will perhaps observe, hurts the simplicity of the picture -- not much, as we
have managed him; and the intention here is, I think, a balance.

The dog on the other side is my faithful Lucy, which you perhaps remember; and
who must be nearer the body than she perhaps would, if we had more room.
However I believe, I shall cause her head to cut off that little cluster of
angles, where the balustrade joins the base of the arch. The balustrade is an
improvement we made the other day: it is, I think, a great one; not only as it
gives a symmetry or balance to the curtain of which you complained; but as it
extends the area on which I stand, and shortens the length of this half-arch.
The painter objected to a tree; I know not why; unless that we could introduce
no stem without encroaching too much upon the landscape: but the reason be gave
was, it would be an injury to the face. -- The console is an Apollo's head. The
impost does not go further than the pilaster, which ends the corner; and here
the drawing is erroneous. -- We are, I think, to have a carpet, though we know
not well how to manage it.

And now, I must tell you the dimensions. -- The figure itself is three feet,
three inches and a half; the whole picture four feet, eleven inches, by two
feet, three inches and three-quarters. -- The color of the gown, a seagreen;
waistcoat and breeches, buff-colour; stockings, white, or rather pearl-colour;
curtain a terra-sienna, or very rich reddish brown. -- I think the whole will
have a good effect; but beseech you to send me your opinion directly. There are
some things we can alter; but there are others we must not.

Your shall have one of the size you desire in the spring; but will you not
calculate for some one place in your room? The painter takes very strong
likenesses; is young; rather daring than delicate in his manner, though he
paints well in enamel; good-natured; slovenly; would improve much by
application. Adieu!

W. S.

CI. To the same, on Fable, and other Articles of Taste and Literature.
The Leasowes. Feb. 9, 1760, Dear Mr. Graves,
I COULD not understand, by Mr. Dodsley's last letter to me, that he had any
sort of intention to publish his Fables this winter. Presuming upon this delay,
and having neither had the leisure nor the frame of mind fit to take his
preface into consideration, I have hitherto deferred to do so; and can only say
in general, that I could wish you had happened to be more copious in your
observations. La Motte's Discourse on Fables is a most excellent performance;
containing, as appears to me, all that need be said upon the subject, and this
expressed with all imaginable elegance and perspicuity. I believe I shall
advise our friend D -- to make more ample use of this dissertation. There is a
translation of La Motte into prose, which is altogether below contempt; and
yet, for aught I know, the only one. The word naive is very probably that for
which he has substituted the word lively; though by no means of similar import.
Natural approaches nearer it; but according to La Motte is not precise: and, as
the words Naif and Naivete seem of late to become more in vouge, I will here
give you an extract of what he says upon the subject: "Je ne souhaiterois plus
rien a l'Auteur de Fables, ^ ce n'est d'etre fidele au sentiment, and de le
peindre toujours avec la Naivete qui le caracterise; car j'ose encore
distinguer le Naturel and le Naif. Le Naturel renferme une idee plus vague, and
il est oppose en general au Recherche, au Force au lieu, que le Naif l'est
particulierement au Reflechi, and n'appartient qu'au sentiment. "Le sublime,
selon cette idee, peut-etre Naif. La Reponse du vieil Horace a la question
qu'on lui fait sur la conduite de son fills; que vouliezvous qu'il fit contre
trois? Qu'il mourut. Cette reponse est naive; parce que c'est l'expression
toute nue du sentiment de ce Romain; qui prefere la mort de son fills a sa
honte. Il ne repond pas precisement a ce qu'on lui demand; il dit seulement ce
qu'il sent. Ce n'est que dans la verse suivant que la Reflection succeed a la
Naivete. Ou qu'un beau desespoir alors le secourut. "Il raisonne dans ce verse;
il n'a fait que sentir dans le premier.

"Les occasions du Naif sont, peut-etre, plus frequentes dans la Fable; and
l'eloge de La Fontaine, est de n'en avoir gueres manquees; dans la Fable du Pot
au Lait, le discourse qu'il preto a sa Latiere est un ches-d'oeuvre de Naivete,
d'autant plus singulier, que sous l'apparence du raisonnement le plus suivi, le
sentiment se montre dans toute sa force; ou pour mieux dire, dans toute son
yvresse."



And now, let me know what English word you would employ to interpret Naif.
Sentimental has some pretensions; but is not wholly to one's mind.

I bought the quarto edition of La Motte's Fables, to which this essay is
prefixed; though the vaunted cuts which tempted me to this extravagance did not
answer my expectation. The author, with much address, begs the Duke of Orleans
to be at the expense of them; which, to the best of my remembrance, was "deux
mill ecus."

Mr. Hurd, you see, is one of Dr. Warburton's Chaplains. I bought his Dialogues
Moral and Political, almost as soon they were published. Sir Edward Lyttelton
told me, the introductory one would be omitted in the next edition. The three
following are very ingenious; but the two former are a little ambiguous in
regard to his intended moral: the two last are wholly political, and I have not
yet perused them, though esteemed the best.

Have you seen Dr. Smith's "Theory of Moral Sentiments," which is prodigiously
commended, and which I have bought, but not read? -- You will see an account of
this in the Monthly Review.

I have lately been reading one or two volumes of The Rambler; who, excepting
against some few hardnesses in his manner, He too often makes use of the
Abstract for the Concrete.
and the want of more examples to enliven, is one of the most nervous, most
perspicuous, most concise, and most harmonious prose-writers I know. -- A
learned diction improves by time.

I am sorry to find no mention of your -- in all the letters which I have
received of late. Do not think of dropping or even delaying the publication of
it; only, if you please, before it goes to the press, let me peruse it once
deliberately. -- What think you, if Dodsley approve it, of admitting cuts into
your scheme?

And now, from cuts I proceed to pictures. Alcock's portrait of me is in a
manner finished; and has been hung up for these nine days past, in its carved
frame, opposite to the fire place in my library. They say it is a likeness,
allowing for the diminution of size. Indeed, if I can conclude any thing from
the strong resemblance which he has produced of others here, I may form some
conjecture that he has not failed in mine. -- Be this as it will, the picture
is, upon the whole a tolerably pleasing one; and this is the most I must dare
to say, considering my own person makes so large a part of it.

What think you of a tawney or reddish brown for the robe or nightgown, with
black for the waistcoat and breeches, reserving green for the curtain? though
green is, with me at least, no very gay color, nor has it that effect which
you apprehended in the drapery. Terra-sienna is a delightful color; so, I
think, is Roman ocre burnt. Let me know then, what objections you have to the
drapery just now proposed. Let me know also any design that you think most
pleasing for a back-ground; or any story of two or three figures, that would be
suitable for a relievo.

From pictures I proceed to painters. I believe, Alcock would go and settle at
Bath, if Amos Green could be induced to join him. Amos Green is the name of the
painter whom I recommended to you before my fever. He is esteemed inferior to
no one in England for fruit. He also paints flowers, insects, and dead-game,
very well. To this he would adjoin the business of water-painting. Alcock would
paint portraits in oil; and to this he would add enamel-painting: both of them
the best-natured young fellows in the world. Now suppose them also ingenious,
and tell me whether they would have a chance to thrieve?

You ought to have a very considerable amends, if you are to be plagued with
writing and with music-masters. -- I believe I rate your time and trouble at a
much higher price than you do yourself.

Dr. Blackstone has raised himself to a very eminent figure, indeed, in the
world of letters. I rejoice at it, without one particle of envy, both as he is
your friend, and a person of merit. I believe no one, besides yourself, would
have dreamt of your odd analogy betwixt him and me. -- I know not how they came
to insert that insipid Song of mine in the Chronicle. -- What sensation it
caused in me, was that of disapprobation; as it looked like laying stress on
what one knows to be of no importance.

The chief points wherein my picture varies from your drawing is in the corner
below the base of the pedestal; where an antique vase is introduced with a
flower and two or three leaves of the scarlet Geranium. The gilt vase agrees
well enough with the gold fringe on the edge of the curtain; but the whole is
so subdued, as not to catch the eye too strongly. It was chiefly meant to
obviate the disagreebleness of the parallel lines and angles occasioned by the
step in that corner; but it crowds that side a little, if one look from top to
bottom; and, though a pleasing object, it is hard to say whether it does more
good or harm.

It is time now to take my leave, with my hearty respects to Mrs. Graves, and
with the usual assurance, that I remain your most affectionate and faithful
friend,

W. SHENSTONE.
Do write soon.



CII. To the same, on his neglecting his Correspondence.
The Leasowes, July 7, 1760. Dear Mr. Graves,
I MUST confess that I do not altogether find your argument conclusive. -- An
hurry of business may be necessary, and somewhat inconsistent with frequent
correspondence; but a state of leisure, which I wished you, does not imply a
course of dissipation; which makes your present apology for not writing to me
before. And so, betwixt business at one time, and dissipation at another, I am
to be defrauded of a correspondence that is quite essential to my well-being.
Pardon me, if, on such occasion, you find me extremely clear-sighted in the
foibles of my friends; and do not say with the man in Horace, "Cur in amicorum
vitiis, etc." The matter is too important for me to connive at any sort of
sophism. -- However, to make you easy on this head, I am convinced the letter
was owing to you; for which I will draw my apology neither from business nor
dissipation; and yet how justly might I palliate my long silence upon either
footing! Since I wrote to you, I have been busied in bringing about a
conclusion with D --. The letters, journies, etc. previous and posterior to the
execution of articles, would afford me noble matter for excuse. -- The constant
attendance upon workmen (of which I have fourteen or fifteen this very day,)
making a piece of water below my Priory, would produce more on the score of
dissipation -- you remember the place. -- This, at present, is my chief
employment, although Alcock is drawing on the side of my table. -- I wonder you
do not get some little urns turned, in any sort of wood, about fourteen or
fifteen inches high, and painted on the side with figures, in the manner of
some antique basso-relievo. He has done something of this sort for me. You may,
if you so please, have the ground a dark bronze, and the figures a light one. I
am of late grown fond of bronze (which you yourself may easily execute) and I
think it always was your taste. -- Dodsley comes hither in about a fortnight,
and prints one edition of his Fables by means of Baskerville's press and paper.
Mean time, he is to give me his picture done by Reynolds; and to send me two
bronzed plaster urns, of about twelve inches, with basso-relievo; and two
figures (ditto) of Homer and Virgil (of about twenty-one inches) for two niches
in my library The parcel is to be pieced out with Ogilby's Virgil, which I want
for the sake of the landscapes. -- And now to the particulars of your letter.

I can readily conceive how much greater pleasure you must receive from the
retinue of your journey, than an Archbishop can from all his equipage; and I
can truly assure you, I find a pleasure in every pleasure you enjoy.

Your room, indeed, will be a noble one; but be sure remember the "Imploravit
opes hominis, fraenumque recepit," and guard against it. -- To speak my
sentiments, I think you will. I think with you in regard to Tristram Shandy; so
does the author of The Monthly Review, you will see. I bought Webb instantly;
but have not read it. Lord Lyttelton is allowedly the author of those
Dialogues; whose, the very last, I do not know. There is a noble specimen of
Scotch poetry translated from the Erse language. -- I have had two copies sent
me from Scotland; and, had I two franks, would send you one. "Chrysal, or the
The Adventures of a Guinea" (real characters intended,) will amuse you.
Something ever occurs that obstructs my traveling at all -- and though I long
ardently to visit you, the Lord knows when it will be; yet be it certainly
will, when I accompany Mr. Knight to Mr. Bamfylde's; where I am pressingly
invited by that gentleman and his neighbors, Lady Egmont, Sir Charles Tynte,
etc. -- I have about an hundred things more to say; which I must defer till I
have heard from you. -- God bless you and yours.

W. SHENSTONE.

CIII. To the same, on Dodsley's Fables, and other Literary Articles.
The Leasowes, Mar. 1, 1761. Dear Mr. Graves,
ALTHOUGH this interval in our correspondence must be placed, I fear, to my
account, you will hardly think it mends the matter, to fill my present letter
even with the best-grounded apologies -- I will only mention a bad state of
health, which has been my lot this winter, as a general excuse for two or three
months silence; and then declare, as with truth I may, that the esteem and
affection which you have so well deserved of me have never undergone the least
diminution or abatement. It is with me a melancholy task, to write letters when
I am not well; although it be the time, of all others, when it is most
necessary for me to receive them. -- Our friend Dodsley, I presume, has sent
you a book of his Fables before this time. What merit I have there, is in the
Essay; in the original Fables, although I can hardly claim a single Fable as my
own; and in the Index, which I caused to be thrown into the form of Morals, and
which are almost wholly mine. I wish to God it may sell; for he has been at
great expense about it. The two rivals which he has to dread, are, the editions
of Richardson and of Croxall. The Fables in Croxall are tolerably written: his
reflections, little to the purpose, either for boys or grown people. --
Richardson's Improvement of L'Estrange would be a better collection, both for
the Fables and the moral Reflections, had he not admitted, through an
extravagant and mistaken love of drollery, that vulgarity of phrase which in
many places is not common English. This, I think, a true state of the case: say
the best you can in behalf of Dodsley. -- As to his cuts, though to him
expensive, they will hardly, I fear, meet with much of your approbation. -- the
scale is much too small -- and the emblematick prints which are larger will
scarce, I fear, be understood. -- I procured a copy from Baskerville before the
plates were inserted, and have caused my painter (Alcock) to supply the
vacancies with some devices of my own -- some account of which I send you, as
it may amuse you for a minute. I want one or two to complete my scheme, and
should be glad if you would propose some in your next letter. -- I return you
my hearty thanks for the hints you gave for the Cambridge verses; but when I
received them it was too late, and I myself too much indisposed, either to
throw them into proper form, or even to answer that gentleman's letter, which I
thought a very genteel one. -- I know not what he did on that occasion, having
seen neither Cambridge nor Oxford verses -- Mr. Dodsley gave me "The Environs
of London." -- Between friends, I wish he may find five thousand readers, whom
the management of that work pleases more than me. -- I will try to get you some
of the cuts, if you desire me to do so, though it will reflect a kind of tacit
dislike of the whole performance -- His brother publishes this winter "The
Works of Soame Jenyns," in three pocket-volumes; and a Chinese novel from a Ms.
translation revised, etc. by a friend of mine. You have perhaps heard me speak
of Mr. Percy -- he was in treaty with Mr. James Dodsley, for the publication of
our best old ballads, in three volumes. He has a large folio Ms. of ballads,
which he showed me, and which, with his own natural and acquired talents, would
qualify him for the purpose, as well as any man in England. I proposed the
scheme for him myself, wishing to see an elegant edition and good collection of
this kind. -- I was also to have assisted him in selecting and rejecting; and
in fixing upon the best readings -- But my illness broke off our
correspondence, the beginning of winter -- and I know not what he has done
since. -- There is a New Peerage going to be published -- with, I believe, the
draughts of the Peers houses -- Lightholer called here, and said he had taken
Lord Lyttleton's, and Lord Stamford's, for that purpose. -- the latter of which
he showed me. -- Thus have I told you what I hear of new publications -- as to
what passes in the busy world, I know no more than the Chronicle informs me, --
unless when your letters happen to be rounded with little anecdotes from Bath.
-- Have you seen Baskerville's new Prayer-books? -- My Lord Dartmouth has
undertaken to present two to the King and Princess. -- Do, for charity sake,
make me some amends for this long chasm in our correspondence, by a very early
and long letter -- I am sick to hear from you; being, with ardent and sincere
affection, your ever faithful friend and servant,

W. SHENSTONE.

Our little life is rounded with a sleep.
SHAKESPEARE.
CIV. To the same, with some Political Anecdotes.
The Leasowes, May 2, 1761. Dear Mr. Graves,
I WILL, upon your last assurance, take it ever for granted, that you do not
omit writing upon any score of ceremony. This will render your silence, at
least in some degree, less irksome to me; when I do not think it the effect of
my own procrastination. -- Mr. Dodsley had sold two thousand of his Fables long
ago; but complained that he should lose thirty pounds by my neighbor
Baskerville's impression; and that he should not be more than ten pounds gainer
upon the whole. I told him it was enough, in books of this sort, if the first
edition paved the way for their future establishment in schools. And surely so
it is: for a book of this kind, once established, becomes an absolute estate
for many years; and brings in at least as certain and as regular returns. I
would wish him to give the polite world one more edition from Baskerville's
press; admitting only a new set of emblematical top and tail-pieces; and
confining those empty cuts relating to each Fable to the cheap edition which he
prints at London. A second edition of this latter sort will appear in a little
time; and if you have any improvements to propose, he will very thankfully
receive them. Mr. Spence offers him to write the life afresh; and Spence,
Burke, Lowth, and Melmoth, advise him to discard Italicks. I confess he has
used them to a very great excess, but yet I do not think they should be utterly
discarded.

I did not intend that Mr. Davenport should ever hear of those verses; and how
he came to do so, is past my comprehension. He seemed to me to have deserted
Worfield, without any intention to return again. I therefore meant to inscribe
them under my own Venus, in order to afford some novelty, at an easy rate, to
those who are curious enough to repeat their visits here. Pray, if you see Mr.
and Mrs. Davenport, present my best respects to them; and as to the verses, I
will send you a copy for them, if you desire or advise me so to do. -- Mr. S --
is agreeable, not void of learning, has some smartness, but little taste. --
Mrs. S -- has much of the latter; and perhaps imagination, which makes a part
of taste, may have had no small share in converting her to Popery. -- Mr. Powys
I have almost forgotten. -- You are ingenious very inventive in regard to the
means of giving yourself mortification. I dare to say, your new building
suggests no such idea as you conceive. -- And I think it sufficient in a
parsonage-house, if one sees detached specimens of taste or elegance, without
uniformity, or even without consistency.

I do not find but that you figure among the gentry near Bath. Dr. Charlton,
who was here yesterday with Sir Francis and Mr. Knight, gave me an account that
the B -- of G -- had been to pay his respects to you. I will not enter into
particulars, but would wish you to cultivate his acquaintance. -- I showed Sir
Francis the dead coloring of the picture which I intend to send to you; -- but
you must know that Alcock is the most volatile of all creatures that have not
wings. By way of improving the picture I meant for Dodsley, he has made it
infinitely less like, and yet it must go to London as it is, for God knows when
he can be brought to alter it.

I asked the Doctor, how Mr. Blackstone came to obtain a seat in Parliament;
and his answer was, "The King insisted on it, as he was a man of learning and
ingenuity." -- The enmity betwixt Lord L -- n and Mr. P --, I find, continues
in its full force; insomuch that my Lord is to have no place while Mr. P --
continues in the ministry. -- My Lord B -- 's promotion was, it seems, demanded
by the D. of N -- and Mr. P --, as they would not be exposed to bear the blame,
while he was the chief mover behind the curtain^ These little particles of
intelligence have, I believe, Sir -- for their author. -- I was told by another
politician, the same day, that we were not to expect a peace -- that the
French, who might give up the Colonies, would not resign the Fishery.

Mr. Knight, his mother and sister, go through Bath to Mr. Bamfylde's in about
three weeks, if nothing intervene. I am teazed greatly to accompany them, -- by
my own inclination, I can assure you, as well as their importunity. I do not
say I will not, nor must I ever promise you beforehand that I will. I have good
reasons to the contrary. They have some thoughts of bringing Dr. Charlton into
the party.

Believe me ever yours and Mrs. Graves's.

W. SHENSTONE.

CV. To the same, on the intended Publication of his Works.
The Leasowes, Sept. 14, 1761. Dear Mr. Graves,
I OUGHT to have thanked you many weeks ago, for a very long and entertaining
letter; the length of which, as well as the entertainment, was increased by a
Postscript a few days after. -- But as the Winter is with me a dull and uniform
season, so the Summer is a time of universal dissipation; and very happy do I
think myself, when after a continual succession of company, visits paid, and
excursions taken, I can sit down in peace and quietness, to attend to the
business of correspondence and friendship. Either reason, habit, or complexion
tells me, that I am never otherwise so properly employed.

The last digression I made was to the concert at Worcester, to hear The
Messiah well performed; to meet a number of faces one knows; but first, and
principally, to visit your brother, without which motive I had not gone. In the
two former respects, the journey answered my expectation: -- but, alas! your
brother was gone into Herefordshire. I, however, alighted out of the chaise;
and the housekeeper very civilly showed me his delightful parlour, that looks
into the meadows, the Prebend's gardens, and down the Severn to Malvern-hills.
A more agreeable townhouse cannot possibly be found any where. But I
regretted, when I reached the inn, that I had not asked to see his children;
for I either heard them up-stairs, had a glimpse of them at the window, or
fancied, to a degree of conviction, that they were most of them within the
house. I now return to remark upon some particulars in your letter -- I believe
it is that indifference you complain of, which is the grand detriment to genius
in an advanced part of life. In all poetical affairs, we are too apt to cry out
with Pallas, "Non est mihi tibia tanti." And this renders all our efforts tame,
prosaic, and judicious. But this propensity, as well as many others, we should
guard against, upon the approach of age: change the object of our amusements;
cherish hopes, well or ill-grounded, of finding that pleasure in the novelty of
objects, which we have not found in any individual. These are the means of
preserving our vivacity a somewhat longer time than it naturally lasts; but how
far it is prudent to attach ourselves to the world that we must leave, is a
point which you better can determine. Refined taste, as it implies a love of
physical beauty, has this tendency.

There is nothing can be more rational than what you say about the expediency
of losing no time, if I mean to collect and publish what I have written. You
are indeed very partial to my abilities; but, allowing for that, what you
mention coincides with what I have thought myself, and this for some years
past. A more agreeable kind of distraction in summer, and an indifferent state
of health and spirits in winter, have hitherto prevented any progress in the
correction of my pieces. To these I might add a suspense about the
compositions, and the manner, proper for publication. I am now most inclined to
make a collection of the whole. I mean, the best of what are already printed or
in Ms.; to publish them by subscription in a large quarto size for the sake of
profit; and to apologize for this method, by mentioning the expense of top and
tail-pieces, with which I mean they shall be embellished. Some of these (by the
bye) may be taken from my farm, the rest emblematical, in an easy and careless,
but, at the same time, elegant manner. I should think the instance of Mr. Pope
might render this method not disreputable; and it might be advertised (as was
done by Mr. Spence) that, unless a certain number were subscribed for, the
whole affair should be no farther prosecuted. This would put it in the way of
many friends to serve me, who (I flatter myself) with inclination, esteem
themselves void of opportunity. Let me beg you to think seriously of this, as
well as of a general title page, before you write again.

Thank you kindly for all the little diverting anecdotes that are contained in
your letter. I am glad to hear your place brings you company; partly, as it
tends to amuse you; and yet more, as it tends to make your merit more
conspicuous. You and I have led a life of total disinteressment. Let me advise
you to seek some advantage from your commerce with great men. -- The boy, who
was here with you and Mrs. Graves, was here last Friday evening with a Mr.
Jolliffe and his son; the latter of whom observed your name upon the bench, and
seemed proud to declare that he was once your school-fellow. Mr. Stratford (to
whom I had written about some gold-fishes) says in his answer, "I had the
pleasure from Bath of waiting upon Mr. G --, and was as much satisfied with the
miniature beauties of his place, as with the polite reception I met with from
the owner." If you have an opportunity, you will oblige me by presenting my
compliments to that gentleman. -- I met Dr. Charlton at Worcester, who stands
high in my esteem. -- The account of Gothic architecture, etc. is curious; but
I have found it in Dr. Warburton's edition of Pope. -- I enclose the verses on
the Venus de Medicis. -- I told you before my intentions, etc. concerning them;
and since, I hear that they have appeared in some one of the Magazines --
through Dodsley's or Percy's means, for I surely gave a copy to nobody besides
-- and those copies must be much imperfect. -- My picture shall be sent to you
as soon as I can possibly get Alcock over, who has promised to come every week
for these three months past. I believe he will come soon. -- I did not know of
Mr. Warton's compliment; but he is very obliging to me on all occasions, and
sends me all that he publishes -- I have not yet read Dr. Robertson's History,
to my shame be it spoken, though I have the honor to know the author. -- I
hope the King will oblige the Irish Peers with a place in the procession, as
that people seem greatly out of temper; and, I fear, not without some reason.

I see my friend Dodsley has let off his little squib upon the marriage, in the
Chronicle. " The King sought a partner," etc. and last night was brought me,
from Baskerville's press, on the same occasion, very pompously printed, the
most despicable Grub-street I ever saw.

I have made some little improvements about my place; have taken away the wall
in front, and made a handsome ring; have extended my path, in one piece of
ground, greatly for the better -- but the grand water in the valley will make
no figure till next spring.

I have also assisted my friend Hull the comedian in altering the Tragedy of
Rosamond; had it brought upon the stage to a full house at Birmingham, where it
was very well received; put Hull into a way of making an indirect compliment to
the present King in the ten last lines of his Epilogue, which was followed by
"God save great George," etc. in a full chorus of the audience and actors drawn
out abreast upon the stage.

Since this, there has been deposited in my hands a large collection of Poetry,
by a Miss Wheatly of Walsall: many of the pieces written in an excellent and
truly classical style; simple, sentimental, harmonious, and more correct than I
almost ever saw written by a lady. They will be published, I believe, by
subscription, under the patronage of Lord Dartmouth.

But nothing in the poetical way has pleased me better than a compliment which
I received about nine days ago by the post, under the feigned name Cotswouldia.
-- She must be some Gloustershire lady that has seen the place; as she raises
up a Fairy in my grove, into whose mouth she puts the compliment. It seems
written by somebody of fashion by the style. -- Can you form any conjecture?

There was a Mr. Freeman of Betstow (or some such name) with two or three
ladies in a coach and fix that were here not long before; a very genteel and
polite young man.

I really know not how to stop, when I begin a letter to you; and it is one
reason why I look upon the task as too considerable to be undertaken at all
times. Pray write soon, and believe me wholly yours and Mrs. Graves's.

W. SHENSTONE.

CVI. To the same, suggesting to him a Subject for Poetry.
The Leasowes, May 20, 1762. Dear Mr. Graves,
I FIND you will not write, unless I give a regular answer to your letters; and
yet, God knows, I have a better excuse for my delay, than I wish my friend to
have for his punctilio -- I mean, indisposition. -- Whence it has happened, I
cannot say, unless I may blame these continual east winds; but I have suffered
more from the smiles of spring, than I have really done from the frowns of
winter.

Having premised thus much, I lay your letter before me. The expense of
printing a sheet of those commendatory verses at a common press is eighteen
shillings; and at Baskerville's about three pounds, ten shillings: nor do I
mean any decorations, unless perhaps "The King-fisher," or "View of my Grove,"
which you know, I have engraven ready to my hands. So you see that this
offering to vanity is not likely to be the most expensive.

I wish you had bestowed somewhat more attention upon the title; in which case,
I really believe the job had been executed long ago. Pray be so kind as to
re-consider it. -- Is not "The Garland of Friendship" a little too quaint? for
that, as I remember, was what I proposed. -- The motto which you proposed was a
very good one; and I think also, that the addition of the next line would be an
improvement to it; "et isti errori, nomen virtus posuisset honestum." But I do
not love double mottoes; so, if I admit this, I must exclude what I proposed;
which, to speak the truth, was of my own invention.

The custom of prefixing commendatory verses to collections of poetry is now
seemingly grown obsolete. Besides, in my case, they would only show, that I had
taken up more fame than my funds would answer. I return you many thanks for
your poetical benevolence; but why do you mention it under the name of Epigram?
I do not even choose that it should have the air of simile from the beginning:
Lo the tall youth, by partial fate's decree,
To affluence born, and from restraint set free;
How pleased he, etc.


I have taken this and some other liberties with it, and shall insert it among
the rest; unless you choose to redeem it, with something more to your
satisfaction; for, to speak with frankness, I think it better calculated to do
me honor than yourself; though I could esteem it good, if it came from a
person whose abilities I respected less than yours. There is a subject here,
which I would recommend to you, if by so doing I should lay you under no
restraint. It is my principal cascade. Its appearance well resembles the
playfulness of infancy; skipping from side to side, with a thousand antic
motions, that answer no other purpose than the mere amusement of the
proprietor. -- Other similitudes, etc. would here occur; Cui enim nascenti
faciles arriserunt Musae, etc. It then proceeds a few hundred yards, where it
rolls and slits iron for manufactures of all kinds; resembling the graver toils
of manhood, either in acquiring money, or furnishing the conveniences,
comforts, or ornaments of life: and, in this manner, it proceeds under the name
of The Stour, supplying works for casting, forging, and and shaping iron, for
every civil or military purpose. Perhaps you may not know that my rills are the
principal sources of this river; or that this river supplies more iron-works
than almost any single river in the kingdom: for so my friend Mr. Knight told
me.

The Mr. D -- you enquire after, and who wrote the best address Sir Robert
Walpole ever received, is Mr. Dodington. -- Did I never send you a list of all
the concealed names in that Miscellany? -- I began to transcribe one from my
own set; but find one part of my list is lost; I however send it, and will
piece it out when I find an opportunity; as I purpose also to give you some
account of our several merits of Dodsley's Fables. By the way, do not the
verses to Dr. Cornwallis (now Bishop) affect you sensibly, vol. VI. p. 158? --
they do me, whenever I read them; and I cannot help applying them to myself. I
feel somewhat of the same sensation when I read "The Letters of Henry and
Frances;" in which (from self-partiality, no doubt) I find myself extremely
like Henry.

Pray let me hear, if you please, of Mr. Davenport. -- I wish I had learnt to
draw well in early life. -- It would have given me some very great advantages.
Let me hear also much of Mr. Melmoth, who, I presume, has left you long before
this time. I did once design to have sent you down my proposals for a
subscription, and requested the favor of you two to settle them finally,
without any further reference to myself; but my head and spirits have been too
bad to undertake even a common letter. -- What think you of Dr. Lowth's
Grammar? -- Livie met him at Mr. Dodsley's, and says, he is well pleased with
our frontispiece, etc. to Horace. Livie could not present his book to Lord
Bute, himself, on account of my Lord's indisposition. Mr. Dalton (Dr. Dalton's
brother) who teaches the K. to draw, presented it. It seems, this Dr. Dalton
(who gave the drawing of Lord Bute's arms) has lodgings in the palace, and sees
the King every day. While Livie was with him, word came that the King was
coming into his room; upon which Livie was sent out another way. -- The King
asked Dalton, whom he had with him? -- and was answered, an editor of Horace,
who had inscribed it to Lord Bute. -- Dalton is to present a copy to the King.

I enclose to you a specimen of the decorated parts of Horace, with the
frontispiece. -- The book will be published in a month's time, when I mean you
a copy from those that are allotted to me.

My Lord Bute's arms are unexceptionably well finished. -- The other plates,
either through negligence, or the wilfulness of the designer and engraver, have
given me infinite trouble and vexation. However, with about two-thirds of my
directions observed, they will, I hope, afford you some pleasure; and discover
somewhat more beauty and spirit than one commonly finds in such designs. --
Send me your remarks very particularly, I beseech you.

W. S.

CVII. To the same.
The Leasowes, Nov. 20, 1762. Dear Mr. Graves,
DO I really owe you an apology? you who are embarrassed with such a number of
momentous concerns, as hardly allow a fair trial to letters of mere amusement?
Alas! I cannot shelter my long silence under a supposition of this kind. I
believe, I even hope, that you have disapproved my long neglect; as I can very
faithfully assure you, I have repeatedly done, myself. There are certain times
and seasons when I have not either the power or the will to write; as Hannibal
said about attacking Rome, "quandoque memtem non dari, quandoque potestalem."
This being an intellectual kind of lethargy, it would have been at least a
friendly office, if you had rouzed me, as you might have done, by a
supernumerary letter. I never receive a line from you, but I feel an almost
irresistible propensity to answer it that very instant. Impediments sometimes
occur; and, that instant being neglected, matter is accumulated for a longer
letter than I am always resolute enough to undertake: at the same time, I can
never content myself with uttering one half of what I have to say. -- Pray is
not that good sort of man, to whom you allude, a Mr. K --? Let him be ever so
good a sort of man in the common estimation, I dare aver him to be neither an
ingenious person nor a candid critic. There may be fifty or more preferable
readings to what are received in this new Horace: yet he will find a better
text there upon the whole, than in any one edition before extant. As to the
beauty of type and press-work, it is too obvious to need vindication. The
accuracy of the latter almost exceeds what was ever found in any other book.
Then as to the frontispiece, it is, I think, much superior to such as
ordinarily occur; the subject animated, and well chosen; and the execution very
commendable: at least, if we allow for the nice touches which it required, and
the uncommon difficulty of getting any thing of this kind done to one's
direction.

Mr. Walpole is a lively and ingenious writer; not always accurate in his
determinations, and much less so in his language: too often led away, by a
desire of routing prejudices and destroying giants. And yet there is no
province wherein he appears to more advantage, in general, than in throwing new
light upon Characters in British History. I wish he would compose a regular
work, making this his principal point. He has, with great labor, in his Book
of Painters, recorded matter of little importance, relative to people that were
of less. I have a right to be severe, for his volumes cost me above thirty
shillings; yet, where he drops the antiquarian in them, his remarks are
striking, and worth perusal. -- I have sent for "Gesner's Rural Poems," and
intend to see "The Death of Abel;" though I expect to find small pleasure in
this poetical prose, unless exquisitely well tuned. -- Thank you for the
anecdote of Lord Courtney: a thousand such sort of things, that engage the
public attention, are never capable of penetrating the depth of my retirement.

Mr. Melmoth you will probably see often, as he intends to make Bath his place
of residence.

The Omphale you sent me is a most excellent figure, and I shall wish much to
get a good cast of it; at least, when I am able to afford it. -- When I write
again, I will give you the best account I can of my share in Dodsley's new
Fables; though it will be no easy matter to speak separately of it, with any
precision.

And now, I think, I have spoke to most of the articles in your last letter. --
Mr. Dodsley, who says he visited you, would acquaint you how we divided our
time whilst he was here, into two principal parts, "l'un a dormir, l'autre a ne
rien fair." Yet we paid our devoirs to a good deal of genteel company; of
which this season has afforded me at least an equal share with any that went
before. I will particularize a few; opening the list with no less personages
than the Duke and Duchess of Richmond -- Mr. Walsh, member for Worcester --
Earl of Bath with Dr. Monson, Mrs. Montague (who wrote the three last Dialogues
printed with Lord Lyttelton's) and other company, from Hagley -- Sir Richard
Ashley -- Mr. Mordaunt -- Dr. Charlton with Mr. Knight -- Earl and Countess of
Northampton -- Mr. Amyand -- Lord Plymouth and Sir Harry Parker -- Mr. and Mrs.
Morris of Percefield -- Lord Mansfield with Mr. Baron Smythe, Lord Dartmouth
and Mr. Talbot -- Marquis of Tavistock and Earl of Ossory -- your nephew Mr.
Graves, with Mr. Hopton and one of the senior Proctors of Oxford -- Lord and
Lady Dacre -- Baron Plessen, gentleman of the bedchamber to the King of
Denmark, with Mr. Wendt his tutor -- Lord and Lady Vernon of Sedbury, with his
children, Sir Charles and Lady Tynte, and Mr. Garrick's brother -- Mr. and Mrs.
Melmoth -- Colonel James -- Lady Ward and Lady Uill, with Miss Wrottesley, Miss
Pigott, etc. -- Lord Lyttelton, Mr. Lyttelton, and Mr. Rust -- Lord and Lady
Dartmouth with Lord and Lady Willoughby de Broke -- Mr. Anson of Shuckburgh
with Mr. Stuart the painter and publisher of "Athenian Ruins" -- Mr. Pepys and
Sir W. Wheeler's son. Mr. Pitt's nephew, etc. -- Colonel Bamfylde with Mr.
Knight's family, etc. etc. I did not imagine my list would have engrossed so
much of my paper, and leave so little room to speak about the individuals. --
Lord M -- appeared to me rather a man of wit than a man of taste; Baron Smythe,
the reverse -- Mr. and Mrs. Morris, extremely polite and agreeable people,
invited me pressingly to their habitation; I could not help reflecting on the
singular happiness of Mr. Morris, to be possessed at once of a large fortune,
one of the finest situations in England, and a wife whose taste for rural
improvements appears even superior to his own; at least, if the beauty of her
person did not impose upon my judgment. There are many others whom I would
distinguish, if my time or paper would permit. -- I suppose that you and Mr.
Dodsley would be mighty unanimous with regard to the propriety of setting my
subscription on foot -- I do not dispute any of your arguments -- they tally
exactly with my own opinion; at least, allowing for the higher idea you have of
my pieces than they deserve -- the truth is, that I have deferred the
publication too long already, -- till many of the compositions will not appear
to the same advantage as before: and till I have not half the power that I had
formerly, to improve them. When I am low-spirited, I almost shudder at this
tremendous contract with the public; when my spirits are elevated, I see the
necessity that you do, of not losing a moment's time -- were you here a week,
you would put the matter upon a footing that was unalterable -- Would to God
you were here, or any one like you! however, it is probable you will soon hear
from me again upon this very subject -- I know this, that if I print at all,
the subscription is by no means to be neglected this present winter. -- I have
seen our friend Dr. Charlton many times this season; at The Leasowes; at Mr.
Knight's; at his own house; and at my Lord Foley's. This visit to my Lord
Foley's was performed about three weeks ago. I went with young Knight; and the
company of the Doctor and Sir Francis Charlton took off all restraint, and made
the visit perfectly agreeable. My Lord's behavior was entirely free and
hospitable; and his conversation lively and entertaining -- I must confess, far
beyond the idea which I have been taught to conceive of him. -- His table, the
most magnificent, I believe, of any nobleman's for thirty miles round -- His
park, and Woobery-hill adjacent, afford views that are either extensive, wild,
beautiful, or grand. The portico before his lodge deserves particular notice --
his house large and commodious, and well furnished; but scarce any of the rooms
high enough to stand the test of modern criticism. But what strikes more than
all the rest, is the magnificence of his Chapel -- which, however, I cannot
stay to describe; for I, this very moment, receive your letter. -- After having
written so much before, I can only touch upon some few particulars. -- I
believe, my scheme of publication will proceed in a little time, and that you
will soon hear from me again. -- If you can possibly excuse me to Mr.
Davenport, and keep me well with him for a week or fortnight, I will not fail
to write him a respectful letter. I am truly ashamed of my neglect; but have
written more letters within this week than I have done for a quarter of a year
before. -- That there is a faction forming against Lord B --. I really believe.
-- The war may suit the (...) world: and the City of London has generally the
art to represent the landed and trading interest as precisely the same thing --
But I think there is a very material difference; which it would be no way
difficult to demonstrate -- at least I am one that cry out, Nulla salus bello:
pacem te poseimus omnes. I am quite unacquainted with the affair relating to
Colonel Wilkes and Lord Bute's son. -- And now (though I mean to write again
soon) I will release you from this unpleasing scrawl. -- I beg however that you
would not fail to write to me directly, if you can find leisure; being quite
impatient to converse with you, after such a chasm in our correspondence; and
being, with unvariable affection, my dear friend, for ever yours. -- Pray my
best respects to Mrs. Graves.

W. SHENSTONE.
My friend Dr. Grainger has written a Poem, in blank verse, which he calls "The
Sugar-Cane." -- It is divided into four books -- and is capable of being
rendered a good Poem. My friend Jago has written another Poem, in blank verse
also, which he calls "Edgehill." -- It is descriptive chiefly of the prospect
-- but admits an account of the sight there, and many little (...) and (...);
with compliments also to the gentry of Warwickshire. -- It lies now upon my
table.



CVIII. To Mr. JAGO.
1762. My dear friend,
A THOUSAND thanks to you for the very obliging and humorous Poem which you are
so kind to send me. I really think it very ingenious, and, upon the whole,
extremely correct; although I have taken the liberty of proposing one or two
hints for farther improvement. The relation that it bears to me and my place
may tend to prejudice my judgment; but I cannot conceive that it requires
aught beside impartiality, to relish the beauties of this Poem. I beg I may
receive a fair copy in your own hand, as soon as possible; and I will consider,
in the mean time, how to show it to the public in the most advantageous
manner. It certainly does me honor: as things are at present circumstanced, it
may tend to do me good: which I am very sure you would be glad to see. I am a
little ashamed to be so much behind-hand with you, in favors of this and other
kinds: but I live in hopes there may come a day, when I shall find occasion to
express my gratitude. The pictures you sent arrived safe on Thursday; and have
been since cleaned, and put up in their places. I cannot enter upon this
subject now; finding it almost six o'clock at night, and having just received a
letter from Mr. Dodsley, which he requires me to answer by return of post. It
relates to the scheme mentioned in his last, which is intended for my
emolument; but which I must not expect to succeed, without considerable
mortification. This inter nos. -- You must by no means lay aside the thoughts
of perfecting Edgehill, at your leisure. It is possible that, in order to keep
clear of flattery, I have said less in its favor than I really ought -- but I
never considered it otherwise than as a Poem which it was very advisable for
you to complete, and finish. I am now to desire my best respects to Mrs. Jago,
and to bid you an affectionate adieu.

Tu comes antiquus! tu primis junctus ab annis! I am, my dear friend! ever
yours, with the truest esteem,

W. SHENSTONE.
Dec. 18, 1762.
CIX. To SHERRINGTON DAVENPORT, Esquire
The Leasowes, Jan. 4, 1763. Dear Sir,
MR. G -- tells me, that you have done me the honor to lay some stress upon
receiving a letter from me. Alas! it must be owing purely to your benevolence,
which makes you wish to hear of an absent friend, and not to any expectations
you can reasonably form of entertainment from his pen. The long letter with
which you favored me was so very lively as well as ingenious, that I despaired
of drawing from my fountains the vivacity you do from the Bath-waters. But, be
this as it will, the vein of friendship that runs through your letter demands
my amplest acknowledgements; and if you will accept of such returns, I promise
they will be as hearty as they are insipid.

I agree with you, that the first sallies of imagination will generally prove
the most sprightly; and that they will often comprehend the principal features
of a subject. They are of the nature of dead-colouring in a portrait; which one
sometimes thinks more spirited than the same performance when finished. And yet
a good painter will not hurt a portrait by the subsequent labor he bestows
upon it, nor will a good writer injure his piece by the pains he takes to round
and perfect it. It must be some defect in the taste of either that makes his
diligence detrimental, or gives occasion for a stander-by to cry out, "Manum de
tabula." I believe it will appear upon examination, that works which cost most
labor have generally been thought the easiest, and pleased the longest. One
cannot, however, deny that there is a sort of persons formed by nature for
shooting flying, (which, by the way, I could never do) and that their sallies
of imagination are what they can hardly improve by any future pains. These may
be called men of wit and fire, but it is the union of taste with these that
constitutes fine writing. True taste will never stiffen or overcharge any
performance: it will rather be employed to smooth, simplify, and give that ease
on which grace depends. One can as little deny that there are kinds of writing
which have a better chance than others to succeed without much labor, which
start forth mature at first, as Pallas did from the brain of Jupiter. Works of
humor are often of this sort; and there are many instances in Butler's
Hudibras. Yet I think the humor of Swift was greatly owing to a judicious
revisal. Pardon me, my dear friend, for this tedious discussion, which you
little thought of bringing upon yourself by the obliging hint you gave
concerning those verses upon Venus. I do acknowledge that an additional stanza
there, containing a reflection on Chinese architecture, were better laid aside.
It seemed to me one of the "splendi da peccata," that might be a little popular
at this time; and has, therefore, for this season, appeared on a board by the
side of the Venus. We, who cannot erect fresh temples, or even add a new
garden-seat every spring, are obliged to make the most we can of a new and
tolerable copy of verses, that costs us thought instead of money; and even at a
pinch to piece out a dull scene with duller poetry: how else could I keep my
place in countenance, so near the pompous piles of Hagley? And yet there are
few fashionable visitants that do not show an affection for the little Amoret,
as much as they admire the stately Sacharissa -- "plerumque gratae divitibus
vices." I have often considered why those possessed of palaces yet esteem a
root-house or a cottage as a desirable object in their gardens. -- Is it not
from having experienced the imperfection of happiness in higher life, that they
are led to conceive it more complete beneath a roof of straw, where, perhaps,
it may really be as defective as in the apartments of a King or a Minister? --
A thousand thanks to you and Mrs. Davenport for the accommodations you so
kindly offer me. Experience will no more suffer me to question the cordiality
than the politeness of your reception. What an amusing picture have you given
of Bath! pleasures carried to the utmost height, and opiates ready when one is
cloyed with pleasures! And yet, let me confess a truth, you have lightly
touched upon those very articles, which would prove to me the most specifically
pleasing. For can any temptation be stronger, than to say that you reside
there? and does not my friend G -- reside at Claverton, of whose genius and
friendship I have had proofs these twenty years past? and have you not Mr.
Webb, and now Mr. Melmoth, to make Bath enviable for the residence of
literature? What a joy would it afford me to go on a party with you to
Percefield, whither Mr. and Mrs. Morris gave me the most pressing invitations!
-- These surely are pleasures of which -- I hope one day to partake.

My health, generally bad in winter and spring, has hitherto been tolerable.
The influenza of last spring continued to depress me half the summer. Would you
think the verses I enclosed were written on that occasion by a young journeyman
shoemaker; and one that lives at the village of Rowley, near me? He considered
my disorder in somewhat too grave a light, as I did not think my life
endangered by it; but, allowing for this, and the partiality he shows me, you
will think the lines pretty extraordinary for one of his occupation. They are
not, however, the only, or, perhaps, the chief specimens of his genius; and
yet, before he came to me, his principal knowledge was drawn from Magazines.
For these two or three years past, I have lent him Classics, and other books in
English. You see, to him, I am a great Maecenas; although you and my friend
expect me to become an author by subscription. -- On this head I will say no
more at present, than that I am infinitely obliged by your extreme friendly
offers. My friend G --, who knows my sentiments, has sometimes the honor of
waiting on you; I ought not, therefore, after this tedious epistle, to begin to
trouble you with a written explanation of them. Believe me, dear Sir, with my
most respectful compliments to Mrs. Davenport,

Your ever obliged and most obedient servant, W. SHENSTONE.
I will send you some other of Woodhouse's verses, when I can get him to
transcribe them.



CX. To Mr. JAGO.
The Leasowes. Jan. 4, 1763. Dear Mr. Jago,
MY last letter must have been confused, and the arrival of it, I fear,
uncertain.

The hare and birds in one of the pictures which you sent me, I think, are
well. The other parts of it indifferent. They gray hound worst of all. The
portrait is by no means equal to its companion, either in beauty of the person,
or skill of the painter; yet it matches so well with the other, that I find my
parlour very much embellished by it. Pardon the freedom with which I criticize
your present; and accept once more my very thankful acknowledgements.

I am truly glad to find so worthy a Nobleman, and so warm a friend of yours,
as my Lord Willoughby is, made a Lord of the Bedchamber.

I have heard nothing since I wrote last in regard to my affair; though I
expect to do so every day. I have such a tribe of humors and peculiarities,
that it is easier to make me rich than to make me happy; and ten to one that
the favor will not be conferred without disgusting some of these said humors,
etc. However, one must make the best of it; and reflect, that mortifications in
one place may preclude mortifications in another.

I go tomorrow, by appointment, to Enville; where I may probably stay till
Saturday. I have wished most heartily for a copy of your Fable to take with me;
but Dodsley has not yet returned that I sent him. Pray consider my proposed
alterations rather as hints than real improvements, and let me have a copy as
soon you can. I wrote my criticism over twice, and know not whether I sent the
best or the worst copy; so I send the other, though perhaps much the same. I
forgot to particularize many shining parts in your little Fable, that are
either elegant or humourous: of the former sort, nothing could be happier than
what you say about H --: as it touches, in the gentlest manner, on a possible
truth, which, if expressed rather than implied, might not be altogether
inoffensive. This beauty is produced by substituting H -- instead of L --, the
place instead of the proprietor.

I have lately read "The Death of Abel." -- It is not void of merit; but might
have been made much more pathetic by a more simple and prosaic style.

I desire my best respects to Mrs. Jago and your family. -- May not I see you
here this Christmas? as I wish to do, because it is the season present; and not
that I am not at all times and at all seasons most unseignedly glad to wait
upon you, and most affectionately your ever faithful servant: Tecum etenim
longos memini consumere soles,
Et tecum primas epulis decerpere noctes.
Unum opus, and requiem pariter disponimus ambo, etc.
Your kind remembrance of me in your Edgehill has brought these quotations into
my head. Adieu!

W. SHENSTONE.

CXI. To the same.
Jan. 11, 1763. My good friend,
I AM suspicious that my letters (of which I have sent two) do not reach you by
the way of Warwick. This is meant as an experiment whether they will arrive by
way of Southam. It is meant withal to remind you of perfecting your little
Fable, and dispatching it to me as soon as may be. I would fain transmit a copy
to Lord S -- 's, before the family separates, or leaves Enville; by whom, I am
sure, it would be admired.

I am just returned from a visit which I made there, and four or five days
passed very happily. At coming away, I showed my Lord two or three of Mr. D --
's last letters, which laid open to him the scheme that was carrying on for me.
I requested also, if there should be occasion (which there possibly might not)
that he would allow me the honor of being known to him. He said, "he was glad
to find what was going forward; and had long wished to see something of that
sort begun before: that he should be in town, I think, in February; and would
do me any service in his power. He desired me also to acquaint Mr. D -- (in
allusion to the latter's uncertainty about my Lord's political connexions) that
he thought it the duty of every honest man to support the present Government;
and that he should continue his regard for the Minister so long as he saw
nothing in his measures that was prejudicial to his Country."

I know that you will take a friendly part in any good that may befall me. Pray
write, be it ever so carelessly; and believe me ever yours, and Mrs. Jago's
most affectionate and faithful.

W. S.

The writer survived the date of this letter but a short time, his death
happening on the eleventh of the following month, to the inexpressible grief of
his more intimate friends, and the generous concern of those, who, too late
acquainted with his merit, were indulging themselves in the pleasing thought of
having provided for his future ease, and tranquil enjoyment of life.

THE END.

