THE Banb^y Apes: OR, The Monkeys Chattering to the Magpye.

In a Letter to a Friend in London.

The Sixth Edition, corrected.



London, Printed, and are to be sold by R. Mawson, at the Bible and Star over
against St. Magnus Church, near London Bridge. Price 1 d.

[Enter'd into the Hall-Book, pursuant to Act of Parliament.]



The Banb^y Apes: Or, The Monkeys Chattering to the Magpye.
In a LETTER to a Friend in London.
Ban^y, June 3. Dear Friend,
THis Day a Messenger (on a Highflying Sorrel Horse) came Post from Dr. S^l,
and rode as if the Devil drove him, to signify to our M^y^r, That he designed
to visit us; upon which the wild, frantic, fiery, zealous Magistrate summoned
his Brethren, the Ald^men, to meet at the Common Hall; but before they were all
Assembled, another Messenger brought Advice, That the Champion was just at
hand; so that Mr. M^y^r, and those with him, went to the Town's End (clad in
old fashioned Formalities) to meet him. They found him very well guarded by a
vast Rabble and Mob, crying (with loud Acclamations) Nonresistance!
Nonresistance! Mr. M^y^r, etc. (headed by one that Records) Congratulated him
upon his Deliverance, etc. And then the Public Entry was ordered as follows:

FIrst came the Bellman and Sexton of the Town, with Staves in their Hands.

Then Two Pursivants, bearing Pendants, with the D^r's Crest (Pope Clement the
XI's Head) and his Motto in these Words, Unlimited Passive Obedience.

Then a Herald, carrying his Coat Armor, being a Field Sable, charged with
Three Cardinals Caps, each with a Golden Band.

Then followed Two Old Women, one having a Bundle of Addresses on her Back, and
a Paper on her Breast, with this Inscription, We defy all Anti-Monarchial,
Anti-Episcopal, and [almost all] Atheistical and Popish Principles; the other
was covered all over with Pamphlets of diverse sorts; before her was The Elegy
on High-Church Passive Obedience, and The Champion pleading his own Cause, but
on her Bum the Effigies of Ben. H^y, with his Head downward.

Then the Sergeant of the Town, with a Mace on his Shoulder.

Then came Mr. M^y^r, with a Book in his Hand, (upside down, according to
Custom) Entitled, The Perils of False Brethren both in Church and State.

Then the Ald^men (Two by Two) having The Collections in their Hands.

Here followed a young Damsel, who had a Promise from the High-C^h Faction, to
have any thing she requested; whereupon she desired the Head of Benj. H. which
she brought in a Charger.

Then 6 Men with Red Hats, having Beads in their Hands, with this Inscription
on their Foreheads, Nunc aut Nunquam.

Then an Old Man, with a long Beard, clothed in pure white Raiment; having the
D^r's Effigies [in Metzotinto] in one Hand, and in the other, a Trinklet
resembling a Cru^fix.

Then followed the Old Women with Green Branches in their Hands.

Then a Woman, preciously decked, sitting ( as near as I could guess) upon a
Scarlet-colour'd Beast, having abundance of Names, written in Capital Letters,
MYSTERY, etc

Then came the High-Ch^ch IDOL [ in Garments as black as his Deeds] on a Sorrel
Horse.

After him 24 Tinkers, beating on their Kettles, that the Spectators might know
what Latitude they were in.

Then a vast Mob, hollowing, hooping and playing the Devil.

In this Order he was conducted to his Inn, where he was again Congratulated,
and presented with Wine. In fine, the Evening concluded with Ringing of Bells,
Bonfires, Drunkenness, and all manner of Lewdness.

The Champion left this Town next Morning, and set out for W^ck, where he was
again met, and Congratulated by the Monkeys in their Formalities. They
entreated him to tarry some time with them; but he declined it, and pursued his
Journey to the next Corporation; for, you must know, he expects the same
Honors to be paid him wherever he goes; which (how strange soever it may
seem to some) is no new thing; for he is not the first that has been waited on
by a Corporation in their Robes; for in the Reign of Q. Eliz. a Fellow, who
wore his Hat buttoned up on one side, and a Feather therein, like a
Tooth-drawer, with a Rose and Crown on his Breast for a Badge, got a License to
make a Show of a great APE about the Country: And coming to a certain Town,
[Whether Banbury, or not, I cannot tell] they beat a Drum about to give Notice,
That there was a very witty Ape to be seen; but the Towns-People, being poor,
thought it not worth their while to see this sight; upon which the Fellow was
enraged, and was resolved to put a Trick upon them; and thereupon sends the
following Warrant to the Worshipful the Mayor.

THese are to Require you, and every one of you, with your Wives and Families,
(upon sight hereof) to make your personal Appearance before the Queen's Ape,
who is a Person of Rank and Quality, and of vast Parts, he having been bred at
an University; and is to visit most Parts of the Kingdom, that by his
Conversation with the Queen's Subjects, he may be the better enabled to
discover their Fidelity and Loyalty. Hereof fail not at your Peril.

When Mr. Mayor had opened the Warrant, he (who always did what he pleased)
holds it topsie turvy, and after some thoughts thereon, sends his Maid to the
further end of the Town, for a Shoemaker to come and read it. When he heard the
Contents, he summoned his Brethren the Aldermen to the Town Hall, to consult of
this weighty Affair; where they sat looking on one another for some time, not
knowing what to say: At length the youngest Alderman, standing up, said,
Gentlemen, If I may speak without Offense, I Will give you my Opinion in this
Matter. -- Speak on, says Mr. Mayor, for though you are but a young Officer,
you may speak as much Sense as any of us. -- Well then, says he, my humble
Opinion is, That this Ape-Fellow is a saucy Knave, and only designs to make our
Town ridiculous: For was it ever known, that a Warrant should be sent, without
either Name or Date, to a Mayor of a Town, who is the Queen's Lieutenant; and
that he, and his Brethren, their Wives and Children, should be commanded to
appear before a Jackanapes? My Council is therefore, That you take him and his
Ape, and whip the whole Tribe out of Town, which will be much to your Credit
and Reputation. The Words were scarce spoke, e're a grave Alderman replied,
Hold, Friend, you have spoke little less than Treason; Remember it is the
Queen's Ape. -- True, Brother, quoth the Mayor, therefore it behooves us to take
care what we say in this troublesome Business. -- Marry, says another grave
Senior, we may see by the Feather in his Cap, and the Badge he wears, that he
is the Queen's Man; and who knows what an Injury he may do us poor Men in the
Country for contemning the Warrant? therefore let us e'ne go and see the Ape;
it is but 2 d. apiece, and no doubt but the Queen will tak^ it well, when she
hears we have shown so much Reverence to her Ape. -- Upon this Speech the
Assembly resolved to pay the Ape a Visit, and ordered the Town Clerk to
acquaint the Queen's Man therewith.

Next Day the Mayor and Aldermen in their Robes, ( the Sergeant carrying the
Mace before them, their Recorder being at the Head of them) with whole Droves
of Townsmen, and their Wives, etc. attended the Ape at his Inn; where they
found him sitting on a Table; Mr. Mayor presented him with Wine, (...) off his
Hat, and made a Leg; but Page did not mind him. Next came Mrs. Mayoress, in a
(...) Apron, and made Pug a fine low Courtisie; upon which he put out his
(...), and made a Mouth. -- I (...), quoth she, I think in my Conscience, the
Queen's Ape mocks me. -- Sirrah, says the Mayor, I see thy sawciness, and I Will
make thee to know that the Woman, whom thou mockest, is my Wife, an Ancient
Woman, and a Midwife, and one who is old enough to be thy Mother. And thereupon
going to his Tutor, Sir, said he, do you allow your Ape to abuse my Wife? --
No, quoth he. -- Truly, says the Mayor, there is sufficient witness that saw him
make Mops and Mows at her. -- The Tutor thereupon gave poor Pug half a Dozen
smart Lashes with his Whip, which made his Teeth chatter; upon which Mr. Mayor
cried out, Enough, Enough: Good Sir, you have done like a Gentleman: I desire
you never to give Correction any more in your Wrath: And when the Play is done,
be pleased to come along with your Ape to our Town Hall, both of you to take a
small Supper with me, and the rest of my Brethren the Aldermen.

But to return to our Champion: After he had visited several Corporations, and
given Audience to the Mob, (who were wonderfully taken with this new
Raree-Show) he dispatches a Trumpeter to Cov^ry, to give Notice of his coming.
-- The Bells immediately rung for Joy: -- But that availed him nothing; for the
Monkeys did not appear in their Robes! which was a great Mortification to him,
and those of his Faction. However, he was met by 10 or 12 stiff Sons of Levi on
Sorrel Nags, attended by a few Butchers and Barbers, who made a Purse, and
bought Two Hogsheads of Ale, which were set in the Public Street, where the
Rabble got shamefully drunk in Toasting a Health to their beloved IDOL.

FINIS.

