JONATHAN WILD.


THE LIFE OF JONATHAN WILD, FROM HIS BIRTH to his DEATH.

CONTAINING His Rise and Progress in ROGUERY; his first Acquaintance with
THIEVES; by what Arts he made himself their HEAD, or GOVERNOR; his Discipline
over them; his Policy and great Cunning in governing them; and the several
Classes of THIEVES under his Command.

In which all his INTRIGUES, PLOTS and ARTIFICES are accounted for, and laid
open.

To which is added, A true COPY of a PAPER designed to be delivered by him at
the Place of Execution, to the Reverend Mr. Edwards.

Intermixed with Variety of diverting STORIES.

The Second EDITION.

By H. D. late Clerk to Justice --

LONDON: Printed for T. WARNER, at Black Boy in Paternoster-Row. 1725. [Price
One Shilling.]

THE PREFACE.
THE Account which the Reader will here find, of the most extraordinary ROGUE
that ever yet Suffered in England, was picked up, for the most Part at several
Times, from his own Relations and Stories of himself; which are the best
Authorities that can be produced for Things which, according to the Iniquity
and Nature of them, were transacted with such extreme Caution.

And it is certain, that the greatest Part of his dark Proceedings would still
have continued a Secret to the World, had it not been, that in his gay Hours,
when his Heart was open, he took Pleasure in recounting his past Rogueries,
and, with a great deal of Humor, bragged of his biting the World; often
hinting, not without Vanity, at the poor Understanding of the greatest Part of
Mankind, and his own superior Cunning.

And indeed, when we consider that it is not a Man's Grandeur, or high Station
in the World, but the strange Adventures of his Life, and his Art and Conduct
in the Management of Things, which gives us a Curiosity of looking into his
History -- I say, when this is granted, we need make no Apology for collecting
these Materials, and offering them to the Public -- for here they will meet
with a System of Politics unknown to Machiavel; they will see deeper
Stratagems and Plots formed by a Fellow without Learning or Education, than are
to be met with in the Conduct of the greatest Statesman, who have been at the
Heads of Governments.

And indeed, when Things are rightly compared, it will be found that he had a
more difficult Game to play; for he was to blind the Eyes of the World, to find
out Tricks to evade the Penalties of the Law; and on the other Side, to govern
a Body of People who were Enemies to all Government; and to bring those under
Obedience to him, who, at the Hazard of their Lives, acted in Disobedience to
the Laws of the Land -- This was steering betwixt Scylla and Charybdis; and if
he had not been a very skilful Pilot, he must long since have split upon a
Rock, either on one Side or the other.

To conclude: We have not taken so much Pains to multiply a Number of Stories,
which would have swelled the Bulk of these Sheets, and increased the Price, and
perhaps tired the Reader; we have only endeavored to trace him through his
several Steps and Gradations, to account for the Policy and Cunning of his
Management, and relating only such Facts as have not yet been made public
concerning him.

P.S. As to the Paper he left behind him, and which we have annexed to this
Edition, it was given me by a Person, who being of his Acquaintance, was
admitted frequently to his Company after his Conviction, and which he assures
me he had from his own Hands; the Reverend Gentleman there mentioned, whom I
know nothing of, can best tell whether he had such a Design of communicating
himself to the Public in that manner, and there I leave it.



THE LIFE OF JONATHAN WILD, From his BIRTH to his DEATH.
JONATHAN WILD was born of very honest Parents in the Town of Wolverhampton in
the County of Stafford. His Father was not rich; however, he provided handsomely
for his Family while he lived, by his Trade, which was that of a Carpenter: But
he dying, and leaving four or five small Children for the Widow to bring up and
subsist, it is no wonder if their Education was no better taken Care of. As for
Jonathan, he showed early Signs of a forward Genius, and, whilst a Boy, would
commit a thousand little Rogueries among those of the same, or a superior
Class, in which he discovered a ready Wit, and a Cunning much above his Years,
though these Actions did not extend to robbing, or any such Crime; but I mean
little collusive Tricks, which served to impose upon his own Companions, who
had a less Faculty of discerning than Jonathan had.

At the usual Age, when young Jonathan had been instructed to a moderate Degree
of Learning, such as Writing and Accounts, he was put 'Prentice to a
Buckle-maker, whom he served seven Years honestly enough; when that Time was
expired, he carried on a little peddling Business himself in the same Way; but
Jonathan wanted Application, which is generally observed to be the Fault of Men
of brisk Parts: Work and he were too much at Variance for him to thrive by his
Trade; he seemed to follow it only at a Distance, often playing the Loose,
wandering from one Alehouse to another, with the very worst, though the merriest
Company in the Place; and was particularly fond of the strolling Actors that
now and then frequented that Country.

After this Manner Jonathan lived three or four Years, leading a Life of
Pleasure, disturbed with nothing, unless it was now and then at the Noise of a
Drum, which he had as great Antipathy to as some Folks to Cheese or a Cat. This
was in the Height of the late War between France and the Confederates, when
the Officers went down into the several Counties for Recruits for Flanders, for
which Kind of Service Mr. Wild had perhaps more Aversion than for any other
Thing in Life; this was not for want of Courage, as we shall prove in the
Course of his History; but he thought a Man of Stratagem might push his Fortune
some better Way than by standing to be shot at, and therefore 'twas necessary
that he should employ the utmost Cunning to avoid it, which however Jonathan
could never have done, but by a Trick which he was more beholden to Nature for
than Art; this was a Knack of dislocating his Hip-bone, which he could do
without Pain, and thereby render himself a Cripple, and repose it in its Place
again without Trouble, whenever he pleased; this was particularly useful to
him, and which he constantly performed whenever his unlucky Stars brought him
within Sight of a red Coat, which he used to pass by in so decrepid and
deformed a Posture as never failed to move Pity in the Beholders toward so
miserable an Object; and he was no sooner out of Sight of 'em, but he walked as
upright and as firm as any Man.

In the Course of Jonathan's Trading, he visited some Market Towns to put off
his Wares, as other Dealers did, at which Time he used to hire a Horse of his
Neighbor's, (for Jonathan's Stock would not amount to one of his own;) and at
a certain Time when Trade grew bad on his Hands, he sells his whole Cargoe for
what he could get, and rides up the Horse to London, instead of returning home
to Wolverhampton; and the Owner heard nothing of his Beast, till 'twas sold,
and all the Money spent.

While Jonathan was spending, in Gaiety and Pleasure, the little Fortune he had
acquired by the Sale of his own Stock, and his Neighbor's Horse, he got
acquainted with several Persons of both Sexes, who were People of Merit, in
their Way; by whose Interest, and the Vivacity of his own Parts, he was
recommended to an Employment of Trust, in which he acquitted himself very
handsomely, considering the Corruption of the Times; but after a while,
Jonathan finding it rather a Post of Honor than Profit, resigned, and went
down into his own Country again. The Employment I mean, is that of a Bailiff's
Follower; the Qualifications of which are Vigilance, Sagacity, Patience,
Quicksightedness, cum multis aliis, which our Jonathan had frequent
Opportunities of exercising.

One of the first Visiters Jonathan had upon his Return to Wolverhampton, was
Mr. --, who lent him his Horse; to whom he opened his Case, letting him know
that he was not one Farthing the richer by living at London, that he had spent
every Groat, and if he threw him into Prison, he would lose his Money, but that
if he would favor him so as to give him Time, he would pay for his Horse at a
Shilling in the Pound per Month, till the whole was paid; and he should apply
himself with Assiduity to his own Business, to enable him to make good these
Conditions; which the Creditor considering, came into, and so the Agreement was
made.

Mr. Wild, pursuant to the above Terms, made two Payments at the Time they
became due, but neglecting the third for a Fortnight or three Weeks, Mr. --
gave Jonathan a gentle Dun, telling him at what time the Month was up, and so
forth, but was very much surpised to find that Mr. Wild was so far from making
any Excuse for his Omission, that he told him plainly he should pay him no more
Money, and wondered at his Assurance of making Demands on him. Why, says the
Creditor, did not you run away with my Horse, sell him at London, and put the
Money in your own Pocket? I did so, answered Jonathan, but that affair was
settled by an Agreement between us that I should pay you so much Money by
Monthly Payments, in Consideration thereof; therefore that Cause is at an End.
Very well, replied the Creditor, why don't you pay me according to that
Contract then? No, quoth Jonathan, that Contract is obsolete and of none
effect. How so? says the Creditor. Why you will allow, says Jonathan, that
Articles of Agreement, or Contracts, not fulfilled, are broken, and Articles
once broken, cannot subsist afterward: Now our Articles are broken, continued
he, for I have made but two Payments, when there are three due long ago,
therefore I owe you nothing.

I mention this Story to show that Jonathan had a Genius for the Study of the
Law; and had not his Practice taken another Turn at first, I don't know
whether, better or worse, as it is practiced of late, he might have been as
eminent, and made as great a Figure as some of his Countrymen.

It was not long after this, that Jonathan found the making of Buckles too
mechanic an Employment for him; his Soul was too great to be confined to such
servile Work; and what was worse, he easily perceived he had Occasion for more
Money than his Hands could procure him in that narrow Way of Business;
therefore he spurned at the Trade, and resolved, some how or other, to transfer
the Labor from his Hands to his Head, as being the most likely Means of
getting a Livelihood fit for a Gentleman.

Big with Hopes, he set out for London once more; but as if he threw himself
entirely upon Fortune, and resolved to court her Favors, he begun his Journey
on foot, and with no more than nine Pence in his Pocket; and the first Day he
was so lucky as to meet with the Goddess in the same shape the Poets describe
her, viz. That of a Woman, traveling on the Road. The Lady was on Horseback,
but however she was so good-natured as to let Jonathan keep Pace with her for
three or four Miles, till by a little Conversation they grew intimate, and
acquainted with each other's Circumstances: She told Jonathan she was an
itinerant Doctress and cured People of all Distempers; that she had been riding
about the Country for the Good of the Public, and was then going to
Gloucester; whereupon Jonathan being in a merry Humor asked her Opinion
concerning his Leg and Thigh, which he presently put out in the manner before
mentioned; the Gentlewoman alighted from her Horse, and handling Jonathan's
Parts, she found his Hip-bone was out of its Socket, a great Exuberance on the
back Part thereof, and his Knee and Foot turned almost behind him.

She was amazed to see this sudden Alteration, without being sensible of the
Cause, and was very much troubled to know what she should do with the poor
Fellow in that Condition; but Jonathan presently put her out of Pain, desired
her to mount her Horse and he would accompany her into Town. He thereupon
replaces the Joint, and walks along before her with great Briskness and
Agility. When she was thoroughly informed of the Trick, she intimated how
useful this Deceit might be made to them both, if he would leave it to her
Management; and all the Trouble he should be at, was to lie a Bed for a
Fortnight, and eat and drink whatever he had a mind to. Upon which she let him
into a Secret, that she knew no more of Physic or Surgery than her Horse, and
only pretended to it for a Livlihood.

It may be imagined, that Jonathan was not difficult to be wrought on to such
good Purposes, for he was never an Enemy to Eating and drinking in his whole
Life; accordingly the Plan was laid, and Jonathan hopp'd into Town in the
Evening in the Circumstances of a poor decriped Beggar-man.

The Doctress set up at the best Inn in Gloucester, asked for a Room, and
called the Landlord, telling him, she found a poor miserable Object upon the
Road, that asked Alms of her, which she presently relieved, seeing him in a
Condition that rendered him useless to the World, and burdensome to himself,
adding that since he might be able, if his Lameness could be cured, to get an
honest Livlyhood by his Labor, 'twas a Thousand Pities he should not be taken
Care of. The Landlord could say nothing to that, 'twas the Parish's Business
where he was born, he said, who should take Care of him? says she, if you have
any eminent Surgeon in Town, a Man of Honor and Probity, that will undertake
his Cure, I will be at the Expense of it my self, and give him a suitable
Reward. The Landlord Commended her Ladiship's Charity, and Jonathan prayed
aloud for his Benefactress.

On Mr. B --, a Surgeon, was sent for, to whom Madam declared her self in like
manner; and the Surgeon took a Survey before all the House of the Part
affected: He saw the Nature of his Lameness, and therefore only asked Jonathan
how long ago this Misfortune happened to him? He answered, in a whining Tone,
About eight Years; and thereupon relates a plausible Story of his falling off a
Tree in a Country Village, where no help was to be met with, and his Mother
being a poor Woman had not wherewithal to pay a Doctor, and the like; but
pretended to be very much cast down, when the Surgeon, addressing himself to
the Gentlewoman, said, Madam, it would be no less than a Robbery to take your
Money, for there is no possibility of serving him, the Bone having been so long
misplaced has contracted a new Situation, and the Head of the Bone has formed a
new Socket so formidable, that 'twould be unnatural now to remove it thence, so
that we must let it rest as it is. This did not seem to satisfy the
Gentlewoman, she was sure, she said, the Limb might be reduced to its proper
Place, with Care taken, if he would apply Fomentations, and other topical
Medicines to the Part, for the Relaxation of the Ligaments, etc. in Preparation
for the Reduction. This was disputed some Time with Warmth, between the Male
and the Female Surgeon, till it ended, as often Arguments do, in a Wager of
fifty Guineas; and the Lady her self was to take the Matter into her own Hands.

Whereupon the Patient was blooded, and then put ito a warm Bed: Stupes were
made of a thousand Herbs, and the Fomentation applied, or pretended so to be,
several times a Day. Mr. B -- visited him once in twenty four Hours; and the
Gentlewoman continued with him all the while for ten Days together; in which
time honest Jonathan acted his Part so well that he roared himself hoarse, for
the Pain he underwent (as it was thought) in this Extraordinary Operation. At
length, one Morning, as Mr. B -- the Surgeon, our Quack Doctress, and three or
four of the Town (for the Affair had made some Noise) were coming up Stairs,
they heard the Patient, instead of groaning and making other dismal Cries, as
he used to do, singing whistling, and what not; so they all burst into his
Chamber, and presently asked the Occasion of his Mirth; Jonathan told them he
never knew so much Pleasure in all his Lifetime, for now he said he was as
free from Pain as ever a one in the Room.

The sly Doctress desired to be informed how and at what time the Pain left
him? He answered, that about three a Clock that Morning (not having slept for
four Nights before) he fell into a Dose, and dreamed that two Angels lifted him
out of Bed, and carried him through several Regions, of which he could give no
Account, and set him down upon a fine Bank of Flowers, on the Side of a
Rivulet; on the other Side of which were beautiful Walks, pleasant Groves, and
curious Waterworks, and in the Center of all, a Pavillion of Ivory, of
extraordinary Workmanship, particularly the Sculpture; the Roof was adorned
with Birds of all kinds, inlaid; and on the Inside a Throne of pure Gold, where
sat his kind and good Benefactress. At the Sight of her, continued Jonathan, I
rose up in Haste, thinking to swim the Rivulet, when a Noise like Thunder
awakened me, and I found my self in this Bed, in perfect Health and Ease. The
cunning Gentlewoman cried out, at that Instant went the Bone into its Place.
With that they turned down the Bed-cloaths, and found Jonathan a whole Man, to
the great Surprise of all the Company.

This extraordinary Cure was looked upon as a kind of Miracle: Mr. B --
believed it as such, paid the Money, ( viz. fifty Guineas) and cleared the Case
up to every Body from any Imputation of Deceit. Jonathan in two or three Days
came Abroad, but limp'd a little; and Madam Doctress gave public Notice that
she would stay a Week in that Town, for the sake of the diseased Poor of the
Country, for whom she would make up some Papers of Powders that should cure
them of all Disorders, and make it the healthiest Part in the whole Kingdom,
for which she would take nothing of them but what the Medecines cost her out of
her Pocket, according to the Cant of all Quacks.

The News run, like that of a great Victory gained over the French and
Spaniards, and People of all Conditions, Age and Sexes, came into Gloucester,
so that Jonathan could not pound Brick-dust fast enough for Sale; the Price of
a small Paper of which, with a Mixture of Brimstone and --, came but to six
Pence.

By this Stratagem the Woman's Fame was so raised, that when Jonathan and she
computed their Gains, they found after all Charges were deducted, that they
were much about 100 l. in Pocket, with which they set out early in the Morning,
and arrived at London safely in three Days following. Here Jonathan lived a
merry Life as long as the Money lasted, and being seduced by the Pleasures of
the Town, had no Thought of getting more till urged thereto by Necessity. But
now an unlucky Accident happened, which seemed to give an ill turn to his
Affairs, for his Lady Doctress took it into her Head to fall out with him;
whether it be that she was jealous of his having some new Amor, (for Jonathan
was always a great Man amongst the Ladies) or whether she could not bear his
Extravagance, is a piece of History we cannot clear up; but let it be which it
will, there arose so furious a Quarrel betwixt them, that Jonathan was laid
aside and obliged to shift for himself. He was after this Footman to one Mr.
Daniel a Barrister of Law, in whose Service he spent some Time; in which
nothing remarkable happening, we pass over in Silence. A little Time after he
was arrested in an Action of Debt; and he being destitute both of Credit and
Friends, could meet with no Body who would venture to bail him, so that he was
thrown into the Compter, where he lay a considerable Time.

Here Jonathan laid the Foundation of all his future Greatness; for it must be
observed, that the Compter is the Place where common Thieves and Pickpockets
taken in the City, are first carried as soon as they are apprehended: Jonathan
took care to cultivate an Acquaintance and Intimacy with them all, and as they
are an enterprizing Body of Men, there seemed to a kind of Sympathy betwixt
their Natures and that of Jonathan, so that they soon crept into one another's
Secrets; he became acquainted with all their Tricks and Stratagems, and when
the Iron Hand of Justice had laid hold of them, and they were entangled in
Difficulties, he often put such Quirks and Evasions in their Heads, and gave
them such Advice, as sometimes proved of great Advantage to them, so that he
became a kind of Oracle amongst the Thieves.

After he had laid a considerable Time in the Compter, he was assisted by a
Friendly Gentleman in Little-Britain, who getting a small Contribution among
his Neighbors, procured Jonathan's Liberty with it.

He had now a numerous Acquaintance, with whom he constantly associated, these
were the Thieves (as has been before observed;) there was no Enterprise they
went upon, whether in Town or Country, but they acquainted Jonathan with the
Particulars of their Success, what Booty they got, and what Hazzards they run,
so communicative are these Gentlemen to those who keep them Company; yet, at
the Beginning, he had so much the Fear of the Gallows before his Eyes, that
they could never prevail with him to go with them upon any Adventure, and share
in the executive Part.

At first, Jonathan drove but a poor pedling Trade, only helping People to
Writings which the Thieves could make no Profit of, and which could be of no
Use but to the Owners, and in this he at first acted with such extreme Caution,
for fear of coming within the Penalty of the Laws, that after he had bargained
with the People, and they were come by his Appointment to pay the Money, and
receive the Writings, he led them into a Room contrived for that Purpose; where
pushing back a small Panel of the Wainscot, a Hand used to appear with the
Writings in it, and the Parties were to take them out of that Hand, and to put
the Money into it, without their seeing the Body which belonged to it; so that
they could not say he had ever taken any of their Money, or received the stolen
Goods; yet the Success and Encouragement he afterward met with, made him more
careless to his great Sorrow.

The first Thing that gave him any Fame, was a Dispute he had with Cornelius a
Tilburgh, a noted Quack Doctor, who being robbed of some Goods, and hearing of
Jonathan Wild, applied to him for the Recovery of them; but after they had
treated some Time they could not agree about the Price; upon the whole,
Tilburgh was vexed he could not have his Goods again, and thinking Jonathan had
them, he arrests him in an Action of Trover; Jonathan gave bail to the Action,
and so a Suit of Law was commenced, which was so well defended on Jonathan's
side, that the Doctor was nonsuited, and Costs were given to Jonathan.

This gave him a great Reputation, among his good Friends the Thieves, who
thought Jonathan the best Factor or Agent they could employ, so that his
Business so increased, that it is thought he got two or three hundred Pounds a
Year by Commission.

But it is no wonder he should thus by degrees increase in Business and in
Fame, for no Man grows great at once. Having now engrossed the whole Traffic
of stolen Goods to himself, he became as useful to the Thieves as they were to
him; for now by his Credit they had a safe way of making Money of every Thing
that fell into their Hands, whereas before they run as great Hazzards, of being
discovered and brought to Justice when they went about to dispose of their
Goods, as they did in stealing them.

But as the Thieves first set him up only as their Factor, he by degrees made
himself their Master and their Tyrant; he divided the City and Suburbs into
Wards or Divisions, and appointed the Persons who were to attend each Ward, and
kept them strictly to their Duty; he also called them to a very exact Accuont,
and made them produce what they had got, and though it were Money he would have
his Dividend; and it was no less than Death to sink upon him, as he termed it;
for there was scarce any Thing stole which was worth having again but he heard
of it, and knew who the Person must be that took it, as well as those who lost
it. This is plain by what follows:

Some time since, the Duchess of Tyrconnel being at Mass, at the Chapel of his
Excellency Count Staremberg in the Pall Mall; her Grace in the Height of her
Devotion had her Gold Watch stolen from her Side, which was entered next Day in
Mr. Wild's Office, who assured her Grace that the Business was performed by a
regular Hand, and therefore he doubted not the Recovery of it. Fox, alias Vaux,
a dextrous Fellow, having his Station about Westminster Hall, the Court of
Requests, and at the Cathedral and Parochial Churches, Wild was assured must be
the Man, though he intending to bite Jonathan of his share, denied it obstinately
at first; but Mr. Wild using Menaces, and threatening, if he persisted, to send
him to his triangular Home, he confessed the Bill, and paid back (as the
Thieves term it) the Watch to the Duchess, for twenty five Guineas.

However fond Jonathan appeared to be of getting Money, he showed a Generosity
to his Friends, not common with People who practice the Law, of which I could
give numberless Instances: Particularly, an Acquaintance of his who lived in
the Mint, having lost a Gold Watch (for there were Gold Watches there
sometimes) he paid back the Watch without one farthing Expense; he returned me
a Pocket Book with some Notes of Value, which I advertised in one of the
Papers, gratis, but gave me this Caution to keep better Company: And one Mr. H
-- ll, then a Justice of the Peace, told me that once going to a Country Fair,
he met Jonathan upon the Road, who gave him a Watchword, by using which, he
said, if he met any of the Prigs that were out in these Hundreds, he would pass
safe. Mr. Giles Tailor, a tall Attorney, losing his Snuff Box, he could not
prevail with Jonathan to trouble himself about such trivial Things as he called
it, but Mr. Tailor telling him he valued the Box, and withal reminded him that
he used to come with Briefs to his Master Counselor Daniel, whom he had the
Honor to serve in the Quality of a Footman: O Sir, says Wild, I cry your
Mercy, you have given me many a Sixpence, call in a Day or two and you shall
have your Box again; which was accordingly left for him at a Tavern in the
Old-Bailey without a Fee.

The Wife of Mr. Chiselden, a famous Surgeon, having been robbed of a Diamond
Buckle at the Bath; Mr. Chiselden, together with a creditable Shopkeeper, near
the Old-Bayley, waited on Mr. Wild for his Advice; Wild being very drunk,
received him with a great deal of Rudeness not usual with him, but he signified
the Cause of his Disgust to him; for he told the Surgeon that he had dissected
several honest Fellows that were his Friends and Acquaintance, and that he
should be d -- d before he should have his Buckle again, which he assured him
was dissected, and divided amongst the jolly Fellows, who had fairly ventured
their Lives for it, and so dismissed Mr. Chiselden.

I mention these Instances, to show that Jonathan's Practice was fairer than
some other Peoples, and that he was capable of more honorable and friendly
Actions, than those that made so great a Noise of their Charity, their
Generosity, etc. It is certain, as the elegant Author of the Weekly Journal
observes, Jonathan hated these Pretenders to his Art, and called them the
Quacks of the Profession which every Science was pestered with.

One time an accident happened to a Gentlewoman at Hackney, who used to let
Lodgings: A Lady, who came attended by a Footman and a Maid, took a Lodging in
her House; the first Day they had Possession of it, they broke open a Scrutore
belonging to the Gentlewoman of the House, which was full of Chince and Muslin,
and very dexterously carried off the whole Cargoe; it was a great Loss to the
poor Woman, who lamenting with her Neighbors, they advised her to go to
Jonathan Wild, and offer a Sum of Money to recover it; she went accordingly,
and when she gave him an Account where she lived, and what she had lost, he
called to his Book-keeper to search the Books, to know if any of their People
had been lately out to take the Air at Hackney: The Fellow having examined,
answered immediately that Wapping Moll had been there, and that Tawny Bess was
her Maid, and Harry Smart her Footman; Jonathan appeared in a Passion, and
cursed them sufficiently, but appointed the Gentlewoman to come again in a
little Time, when he procured the Things upon her paying the Money agreed for.

Thus he made them all pay Contribution, whether they made Use of him in
disposing of the Things or no: And when the late Act was made, which gives a
Pardon to one Felon for convicting another, he became absolute over them all;
for if any of them disobliged him, or, as he called it, rebel'd, he took them
up, and thereby got the Reward appointed by Act of Parliament for taking
Highwaymen: On the contrary, when any of his own People were taken, which he
had a Mind to save, then he endeavored to take some other; then his own Man by
claiming the Benefit of the Act became an Evidence. When ever any interloping
Traders started up in the Business, that is, People who set up for themselves
without paying him any Contribution, or Homage, or holding any Correspondence
with him, he did all he could to take them; and if such were otherwise taken up
upon Suspicion, or upon any Information, and Evidence was wanting to convict
them, nothing was more common than for him to take up one of his own Fellows,
whose Life was always in his Power, and make him swear himself into some of the
Robberies, of which the others were suspected, whereby their Evidence might
obtain some Credit with a Jury, and Jonathan was entitled to the Reward if he
was the Person who took them.

And thus by taking some of his own Gang now and then, because they had
disobliged him, and apprehending others because they were not of his Gang, and
hanging them in the manner before described, he was reckoned a very useful Man,
and was often called upon by the Court to look at the Prisoners, and give them
Characters; which seemed to have great Weight at that time. And sometimes, by
ingenious Quirks, or by managing the Juries or Evidences, he has brought off
some of his Favorites, who had been taken in the very Facts for which they
were committed; as he did once by two Fellows, who having committed a Robbery
on the Highway, and several Persons well mounted and armed happening to come by
immediately, they were pursued and taken, with the Gentlemen's Watches and Rings
about them; and being forthwith carried before a Justice of Peace, were
committed to Newgate; within a Day or two of the Sessions, Jonathan, whose Wit
seldom failed him at a Pinch, enquiring the Names of the Prosecutors, went to
them, and asking them if they had not been robbed by such and such Fellows, now
in Newgate? The Gentlemen answered they had. Jonathan pretending a great Spleen
to those Fellows, who he said were the greatest Rogues in the whole World, and
that he would have hanged them long ago if he could have found them; and
therefore begged of the Gentlemen that he might assist them in managing the
Prosecution, and he would engage the Rascals should not escape: The Gentlemen,
very willing to have Part of the Trouble taken off their Hands, accepted his
Offer, knowing Mr. Wild to be a Person very well skilled in those Affairs.
Accordingly, they appointed to meet at a Tavern in the Old Bailey, on the
Morning which was appointed for the Trial of these Highwaymen: When they met,
Jonathan told them there was a great Crowd in the Court, and that they had
better stay there till the Trial should begin; which he said would not be till
about Three a Clock in the Afternoon. In the mean time a Dinner was bespoke, to
be ready at One; and Jonathan sent a Man to wait in the Court, with orders to
call them when the Trial came on. Jonathan made such good Use of his Time, that
whether by putting something into the Liquor, or by fair Drinking, is not
known; but it is certain he made the Gentlemen very drunk, who passed away the
Time till Evening without thinking of the Matter; at which Time one of them
wondering that their Messenger had not called them, they sent another to the
Court, to know what was doing there; when they found the Court was broke up,
and the two Highwaymen were discharged, there having no Evidence appeared
against them.

In an Affair like this, Jonathan did not come off quite so well, though the
Business was managed with equal Success; the Story is this, One Arnold Powell,
a notorious Housebreaker, was committed to Newgate, and a Prosecution carrying
on against him by one Mr. Eastwick, a Glass-grinder, near Bridewell. Jonathan
pays his Respects to the Prosecutor, and acquaints him how ready he should be
to bring such a Villain to Justice, and if he would leave the Matter to his
handling, he should certainly send him to sleep with the Fathers, for that was
his Expression. Accordingly Mr. Eastwick commits the Management of the Suit to
him, and chose to be directed by him; who, he was satisfied, had a better
Understanding in those Affairs than himself.

Before the Sessions, Jonathan, though retained on the other Side of the Cause;
visits Mr. Powell, tells him of the dangerous Circumstances he was in, and at
the same Time enquires into the Value of his personal Estate; the Thief
apprehended his meaning, and made him sensible that forty Pounds should not
part them, (for it seems this Fellow never came into Jonathan's Books)
whereupon the Bargain was struck, the Money paid down, and Mr. Wild left him
with this Blessing, Live and prosper.

When the Sessions came on, a Bill was found for Felony and Burglary against
Mr. Powell, for breaking open, and robbing the House of the said Mr. Eastwick;
so far Mr. Eastwick saw Matters were carried fair: When this was done, Mr. Wild
desired the Prosecutor and his Witnesses to go to his House in the Old-Bayley,
that they might nor wait about in the Sessions house-Yard, till the Trial came
on, which they readily agreed to; from thence Jonathan carried them to an
Alehouse at the Upper-end of the Street, quite out of the hearing of the Court,
and there plies them with Liquors by one of his Agents; in the mean Time he
gets Powell set to the Bar, and the Witnesses called over and over, time after
time, but no Body appearing, nor any Account to be given why they did not, the
Prisoner was acquitted.

When Mr. Eastwick found how the Game had been played, he complains to the
Recorder of the Abuse, who was very ready to do Mr. Wild all the Justice in the
World, and therefore commits him to Newgate, in order to be tried at the
ensuing Sessions for the Offense; and Powell, though acquitted then for want of
Evidence, was detained in Custody, and convicted the next Sessions, perhaps for
another Fact, and executed; but honest Jonathan alighted upon his Legs like an
expert Tumbler, and came off unhurt.

However, this was by discerning Men looked upon to be a kind of a Slur upon
Jonathan's Character; he found himself, that after this he had not that Credit
with the Court upon the Trial of any Criminal, as he used to have; and he took
as odd a way to retrieve it as ever was thought of; for in order to insinuate
himself into the good Graces of the R -- r, he sets one of his Gang to steal
the Velvet Seats out of his Coach, and then waited upon him with a Tender of
his Service, to recover them without any Expense to his Honor; but Sir W -- m
despised his Offer, and generously chose rather to sit down with the Loss, than
to recover them, by giving Countenance to such scandalous Practices.

By all the beforementioned Tricks and Artifices, Jonathan passed for a Man of
so much Understanding and Interest, that the Thieves began to think he could
hang or save whom he pleased; so that all Malefactors, whether of his own Gang
or not, after they were taken, used to flatter themselves that if they could
raise any Money for Jonathan, he would bring them off; and even after they were
condemned, they were of Opinion that his extraordinary Interest might procure
them a Reprieve, or have the Sentence changed to Transportation.

It is certain that it was one of his Arts to make them believe so; and he used
particularly to affect an extraordinary Intimacy with certain Justices of
Peace; and as it is said he sometimes drank with those Gentlemen at Taverns, he
used to leave word at Home, that if any Body should enquire for him, he was
gone to such a Tavern, to meet Justice such-a-one. The Use he made of
insinuating this Notion into their Heads was, that if any Information should be
given to these Justices, against any of his Friends, he should have timely
Notice of it, from them or their Clerks, so that the Party might get out of the
way; which was a material Thing toward keeping his People always depending
upon him.

The Reader will imagine, by what has been here related, that Jonathan must be
a Person of no uncommon Parts: -- To govern a Commonwealth already fixed and
established, is no more than what may be done by any common Capacity; but to
form and establish a Body of such lawless People into what we may call a Form
of Government; to erect a Commonwealth like that of the Bees, in which there
should be no Drone, in which every Member was obliged to go forth and labor,
and to bring an Offering to him their King, of Part of the Product of their
Cunning and Industry; to be able so many Years to evade the Punishments
appointed by the Laws of all Nations, for such Persons as make no Difference
betwixt Meum and Tuum; and to live not only in a Toleration, but even in a kind
of Credit, amongst the People he was robbing every Day, and to escape the Plots
and Conspiracies of his own treacherous Subjects -- I say, to be able to manage
all this, must proceed from an admirable Wit and Cunning, and thorough
Observation of the Humors and weak Sides of Men.

But to return to our Subject, we have taken Notice in what manner Jonathan's
Revenues were raised and increased; but as his Subjects were so frequently
taken off by untimely Ends, his Royalty would by degrees have declined and sunk
at last to little or nothing, if he had not by admirable Foresight and Care
provided future Thieves both for himself and the Gallows.

The Mint in Southwark was the Country where Jonathan usually went to raise
Recruits when his Army began to grow thin and weak; there I say he constantly
beat up for Volunteers, and most of his best Men came from thence.

He knew it was the Place where Tradesmen who had met with Misfortunes first
retired to, that it was the constant Retreat of all those whom Idleness, or
Extravagance had rendered obnoxious to the Law -- He knew also that People
under those Circumstances commonly brought a little Money with them at their
first going over, which being soon spent, by reason of their being out of
Business to get more, they must of Consequence be reduced to extreme Necessity,
till which Time he did not judge them rightly qualified for his Service.

As I was let into this Secret of his Proceedings by a Story from his own
Mouth, I shall relate the Method and Way he went to work with the Gentlemen
Minters.

First, He made himself acquainted with all the People who kept public Houses,
whether Taverns, Alehouses, or the Venders of the royal Liquor commonly called
Gin; from these he learned from Time to Time what People were newly come over,
and if he liked the Description of their Persons, and the Account of their
Circumstances, he took some Opportunity of getting into Company with them; and
Jonathan, being facetious as well as frank and open in Conversation, made
himself very agreeable to those sort of People, who are called merry Fellows;
besides, Jonathan always pretended to compassionate their Misfortunes, and to
show his Generosity would treat them, and make them drunk, and sometimes
perhaps lend them small Matters in their extreme Necessities -- So that he has
sometimes confessed, that by half a Crown well disposed, that is lent with a
certain Manner of which he was Master; he has sometimes got fifty, and
sometimes a hundred Pounds; which it must be confessed was laying Money out to
a very good Advantage.

We shall prove this by an Example -- Jonathan came acquainted with A. B. a
broken Cheesemonger, who had taken Refuge in the Mint; this poor Fellow, being
charmed with the Conversation of the ingenious Jonathan, spent the little Money
he had saved from the Ruin of his Trade, in keeping him Company; when all was
gone, Jonathan now and then lent him some small Matter, and observing him to be
young, active, and a Fellow of Spirit, worked upon him, and brought him into
his Measures, by representing to him the miserable Prospect he had before him;
telling him he deserved to be damned if such a clever Fellow as he should want
good Clothes on his Back, or Money in his Pocket, and that all the World would
despise him; therefore, says he, take my Advice, and get Money -- The Advice
was good and seasonable; for there was nothing in the World the poor Fellow
wanted more: But how to do it was the Difficulty -- therefore he begged his
Friend Jonathan to give him some Advice in that important Affair; Z -- ds, says
Jonathan, I know a great many clever Fellows, who keep the best Company in
Town, and make very smart Figures, and if they have not Sixpence in their
Pockets now, they will have Money enough before they go to Bed, that is, if there
be any Money to be had betwixt this and Bath, or this and Tunbridge.

Now the Cheesemonger began to apprehend his Friend Jonathan, and in his
Necessity and Despair, said he would do any thing; but he had neither Horse nor
Arms, nor any means of purchasing them; but Jonathan, who did nothing by
halves, directed him where good Horses were to be hired for the Use of the
Gentlemen of the Snaffle, and gave him as much Money as would pay for the Hire,
for he was too cunning to appear in the Matter himself; he also directed him to
go upon the Epsom Road, telling him there were no Gentlemen out upon the same
Lay that way -- and thus our Cheesemonger was turned into a Gentleman, and
equipped like a Knight Errant in search of Adventures.

After he had loiter'd about the Road for some time, he saw one Man a Horseback
coming toward him without any Servant or Attendance, which proved to be a
peaceable Citizen; him he ventured to stop, and commanding him to deliver, the
Citizen surrendered all the Money he had without any Words, which proved to be
nine Guineas: As soon as our new Highwayman found himself in Possession of the
Money, he made the best of his way Home to his Kennel the Mint, without seeking
any more Adventures that Day.

He was no sooner alighted, but he found Jonathan, who waited to receive him,
to whom he very frankly gave an Account of what he had done, and what he had
got with all the Circumstances, thinking he had behaved himself very handsomely
for a new Beginner; nay, Jonathan himself praised him, and for his
Encouragement took from him but seven Guineas of the nine, leaving him two as a
mark of his Favor.

Perhaps some may be of Opinion, that this Dividend was a little unequal, and
that he who ventured all should have had the greatest Share of the Booty; but
it must be considered on the other Side, that now he was initiated, he was
become the Subject, nay, the Slave of Jonathan, who had power of Life and Death
over him; and that so far from murmuring at what he took from him, it was
Jonathan's Opinion he should think himself obliged to him that he did not hang
him.

The Fellow continued every now and then to make Excursions, sometimes on one
Road, sometimes on another, constantly doing Business by himself; and if we may
believe Jonathan, he always left the Fellow some small Matter of what he got,
whether it happened to be little or much, but this we must take upon his
Credit; but however that be, the Cheesemonger was so discontented, that he
resolved to desert, and see what he could do for himself.

Accordingly, some time after he disappeared, nor could Jonathan find him out
by all the Inquiry and Search he could make; Jonathan railed loudly at him,
saying, Thus am I served by a parcel of Rascals when I have put Bread into
their Mouths, but I Will hang him if there was not another Rogue left in England.
-- While Jonathan was thus enraged against the Deserter, some People who had
been robbed upon the Oxford Road, came to make Proposals for the Recovery of
some Watches and Pocket Books which had been taken from them; Jonathan
consulted his Books, (for it must be observed, he was very exact in minuting
down all his Orders) and found that no Gentlemen under his Command had been out
upon the Road for a Fortnight before; wherefore he was very inquisitive to know
what sort of Man the Person was who had committed those Robberies; and
according to their Description, and by other Circumstances, he was pretty sure
it must be the deserting Cheesemonger.

Jonathan therefore set out toward Oxford well mounted, and well armed,
intending to renew his Acquaintance with his old Friend, who, according to
several Reports, had met with good Luck upon that Road; he jog'd on easily,
visiting all the Villages which lay in the By-Roads, both on the Right and
Left, going into every Inn, looking into the Stables to see the Horses, and
drinking with all the Ostlers and Chamberlains, and enquiring of them what
Company was in each House, and what Company they lately had; which was his
constant Method when he went in search of a Deserter.

He spent a good deal of Time in this manner to no purpose, when moving on
toward Oxford, he met a Coach which had been just robbed; the Coachman giving
him warning to take care, and telling him the Place where they had been
attacked, was not above a quarter of a Mile off: Upon this, Jonathan enquires
the Number of the People who had robbed them; the Coachman told him it was done
by a single Man, and in describing him, confirmed Jonathan it must be his
Cheesemonger: Upon this Assurance, Jonathan sets Spurs to his Horse, and coming
to the Spot which had just before been the Scene of Action, he hastes, and
takes a View of the Ground like an experienced General; and considering with
himself what a Man of any Discipline would do after such an Incident, in order
to puzzle and beguile his Pursuers in case any Hue and Cry should be raised to
pursue him, he spied a Lane upon the right Hand, and wisely concluded with
himself, that if the Cheesemonger was a Man of Conduct, he must have struck
down that Lane, after he had finished his Adventure; therefore he doubled his
Pace, and after a short Gallop came in sight of a Man in a great Coat, well
mounted; he judged now that he was come to the end of his Enquiry, and
therefore slackened his Pace, that he might prepare himself for Battle, (for
Jonathan's Courage was equal to his Conduct). The Man before hearing the Tread
of a Horse, looked back; but seeing no more than one Man, he thought it had not
the Appearance of a Pursuit, and therefore he never moved a Step the faster;
and it was at such a Distance, that he did not know the sweet Fiz of Jonathan.
Jonathan, who was stuck round with Pistols, as thick as an Orange with Cloves,
or like the Man in an old Almanac with Darts, was not idle all this while, but
took care to be well cocked and prim'd, which Part he managed under his Great
Coat; for he took care to conceal his warlike Appointment, lest it might put
the Enemy into a Posture of Defense.

As he approached nearer, the Man cast another Look back, and immediately knew
it was Jonathan: Upon which he faced about manfully, and drawing his Pistol,
bid Jonathan stand off, for he had done with him. Jonathan put on the Fox's
Skin, and employing all his Oratory (for he had an excellent Talent at
wheedling) begged that they might be good Friends, and go and drink together,
swearing that he loved Men of Courage, and that he desired nothing but that
they might be good Friends as before -- But the valiant Cheesemonger told him
his Mind in few Words; Jonathan, says he, you have led me here into a damned
Trade, which I am weary of, and now I Have got Money in my Pocket, I am resolved
to go over to Holland, and try to put my self into some honest Business, by
which I may get my Living, without Fear or Danger. Jonathan, having a Pistol in
his Hand, under his Great Coat, which the other could not see, still continued
his Wheedling, and approaching nearer and nearer, that he might have a sure
Mark, he of a sudden drew forth his desperate Hand, and let fly a Brace of
Bullets in the Face of the valiant Cheesemonger, and drawing forth a sharp
Hanger at the same Instant, flew upon him like a Tiger, and with one Blow
felled him to his Horse's Feet, all weltring in his Gore -- So have I seen, and
with as little Mercy, a gallant Ox felled to the Ground by some fierce Butcher,
and so, like Jonathan, have I seen him bestride the mighty Beast, and strip him
of his Skin.

Jonathan thus having obtained a complete Victory, and being Master of the
Field, immediately fell to plundering -- He found fifty odd Guineas in the
Fellow's Pockets, with some Movables of Value, of which having taken Livery
and Seisin, according to the Law of Arms, he went to the next Town, leading the
Horse of the slain in a kind of Triumph, as a Mark of his Victory; and
enquiring for the next Justice of Peace, he surrendered himself, telling him
that he had killed a Highwayman; and giving a Direction where he had left the
Body, the Justice sent and had it taken up, when he was known by some Stage
Coachmen and others to be the same that had infested that Road for some time
past: Jonathan at the same time signifying to the Justice that he was the
famous Wild the Thief-catcher; the Justice took Bail for him, and Jonathan
returned Home to his Wife loaded with Victory and Plunder.

I presume this Story may suffice to let the Reader know by what kind of Policy
this Machiavel of Thieves supplied his Commonwealth with Subjects as fast as
they were cut off -- Those whom he observed to be active, brisk and courageous,
he put into his Cavalry; there was another Corpse which we may call his
Dragoons, because they served sometimes on Horseback, sometimes on Foot, as was
most consistent with the Service; these sometimes went forth doubly armed, and
on the wide extended Common attacked the Stage Coach in open Day; other whiles
they laid Ambuscades, and lying perdue in some Ditch, surpised the heedless
Traveller on Foot, and were counted his best Men, being, as the Saying is, in
utrumque parati, or having two Strings to their Bow.

But as Jonathan was a deep Studier of Nature, he knew that Men's Talents were
different, and that he who had not Courage enough to bid a Man stand, upon the
Road, might nevertheless make an excellent Pickpocket; and he took care that no
Man's Parts should be misapplied: Nay, it is said that nothing pleased him more
than to see a Child or Youth of a promising Genius, and that such never wanted
his Encouragement; insomuch that a little Boy in a Crowd, having at a certain,
time stole a Pair of silver Buckles out of a Man's Shoes, without being felt,
his Mother, not a little proud of her Child's Ingenuity, presented him to
Jonathan, who gave him half a Crown, with this prophetic Saying, My Life on it,
he will prove a great Man -- But I must observe, that Jonathan's Prophecy never
was fulfilled, the Youth dying before he came to the Age of Manhood, for he was
hanged before he arrived at sixteen.

He had another Sort of Gentlemen under his Command, whom in the Cant or
Language of the Profession, he distinguished by the Name of Spruce Prigs; these
were Persons not qualified for the bold and manly Employment of Knocking-down,
House-breaking, etc. but being Persons of Address and Behavior, were
dispatched to Court on Birth-Nights, to Balls, Operas, Plays and Assemblies,
for which Purpose they were furnished with laced Coats, brocade Wastcoats, fine
Perriwigs, and sometimes equipped with handsome Equipages, such as Chariots,
with Footmen in Liveries, and also Valet de Chambres, the Servants being all
Thieves like the Master.

This Body of Gentlemen were generally chosen out of such as had been Footmen,
who by waiting at Tables, and frequenting public Places with their Masters and
Mistresses, knew something of the Address and Discourse used among Gentlemen;
and the better to qualify them to acquit themselves handsomely at Balls,
Jonathan sometimes paid a Dancingmaster to teach them to dance; that is, after
he lost his own Dancingmaster, the celebrated Mr. Lun, who died in his own
Profession, viz. dancing; being hanged at Kingston, for a Robbery on the
Highway; who he sometimes said was a great Loss to the Corporation.

There were another Class of the same Sort of Gentlemen, but who did not strike
such bold Strokes as the other; or, as we may say, did not fly at such high
Game; these appeared commonly like young Mercers or Drapers, being always
dressed very clean in plain Cloth, good Wigs, and good Linen, with a Ring or
Rings on their Fingers; the Places which they haunted most, were Sadlers-Wells,
and all the Hops about the Town: They were also great Practicers of the Art of
Dancing; and some of them were famous for Hornpipes.

Their Business was to promote Country-Dancing, and while the young Fellows and
their Girls were very earnest at their Diversion, they were to assist a
Confederate (for nothing could be done without a Partner) to carry off the
silver Swords, and Canes, if there were any; whilst the Dancer himself was to
stand his Ground, always pretending to have lost a Cane, or Hat, amongst the
rest, and making the greatest Clamor of all.

The genteelest of these Sort of Gentlemen sometimes took handsome Lodgings of
two or three Guineas a Week; and being attended by their sham Servants, these
Servants were to give out that their Master was just returned from his Travels;
that he was a Peer, or at least a Baronet of a great Estate: And the better to
carry on the Bite, they took care to assume the Name of some Person of great
Estate, who was actually Abroad -- that his Father, or some Relation, being
lately dead, was the Occasion of his coming over in Haste, to take Possession
of a great Estate; and that His Lordship, or Honor, would not appear, nor have
it known he was arrived, till he had put himself and all his Servants in
Mourning; wherefore a Draper was sent for, and a vast Quantity of fine Cloth
was agreed for; not only for his own Family, but he was to give Mourning to all
his Relations -- The Draper was generally recommended by the Landlord, who
thought himself very happy in having such a Customer as His Lordship -- As soon
as the Cloth came in, it was immediately sent off, being carried away by some
Accomplices who waited in the Way, and represented Porters, before the Draper
could come for his Money -- But if, as it sometimes happened, the Draper came
himself at the same time with the Cloth, why then His Lordship was so busy in
his Closet that he could not speak to him, but he sent him out a Banker's Note,
desiring him to give the rest; but if the Draper had not Money enough about
him, then he was to go and receive the Whole, and bring His Lordship the rest;
but as soon as his Back was turned, the whole Posse moved off, leaving
generally an empty Trunk or two to pay for the Lodging.

This Trick has often been played in the Streets betwixt the Temple and
Somerset House, the Situation of those Places being very commodious for making
a Retreat by Water.

Jonathan one Night at Southwark-Fair, was observed to sit in one of the
Booths, in a Corner of the Pit, as much out of sight as he could; and being
asked by an Acquaintance what he was doing there? -- See that Beau (says he) in
the Side-Box, pointing to a handsome young Fellow, who was very fine, that is
one of my People, but the Son of a Whore has hid himself from me these two
Months, but I Will frighten him out of his Wits; and if you have a mind for a
little Sport, go to the next Tavern, and I Will divert you -- We had not been
there two Minutes (for I was one of the Company) when Jonathan enters, with Sir
Fopling; Jonathan immediately, with many Oaths and Menaces, began to question
him where he had been, and what the D -- l was the Reason he had not come near
him in all that Time? The Beau, in a very great Fright, swore, and cursed, and
prayed, all in a Breath, begging Jonathan to forgive him, telling him he could
not help it, having been in Jail in Lincolnshire; where he went upon a very
good Lay, (that was his Term) for he went down there expecting to marry a Lady
of great Fortune; but that miscarrying, that he might not lose his Labor, he
spoke with a silver Tankard and some Spoons, for which he was committed;
however, he managed it so well, by the Assistance of nimble Dick, who
personated his Servant, that nothing was found upon him, and so the Pimps
discharged him; not out of good Will, d -- n them, says he, but for Want of
Proofs. But that he was upon a Lay at that time (if he would let him go) that
he was sure of getting a Gold Watch that Night; and swore upon his Honor he
would bring Jonathan some Money the next Day.

Upon these Protestations and Promises, and his paying for a Bottle of Wine,
Jonathan let him go. -- When he was gone, Jonathan told us he was an ingenious
pretty Fellow, and would live like a Gentleman in any part of the World; for
that the last Birth-night he went to Court as fine as any thing there, and no
body knowing him, he was taken for some young Man of Fortune, just come to his
Estate; his Design being to pick the King's Pocket, but that he was hindered
and interrupted by a certain Lady, a Citizen's Wife, who would not let him get
near enough for the Fondness she had of showing herself to his M -- y; however,
it cost her dear, for she lost her repeating Watch by the Bargain. -- He told
us that he had saved the young Fellow's Life once by good Management at his
Trial; for he thought it was pity such a clever Fellow should be cut off so
soon, and that he had done a great many handsome Things since that Time: We
desired to know of Jonathan what the young Fellow was originally; he told us he
was the Son of a Chairman, who living with a Lady of Quality, she put this
young Fellow, when a Boy, into a Livery; that this Lady loving her Pleasures,
and being a Woman of Intrigue, the Boy got the Reputation of being a very good
Pimp; so that if his Lady had not died, he would have been made a Page, and
then perhaps Groom of the Chamber, and then recommended to my Lord for some
considerable Post; so that by this Time he might have been a topping Grandee,
if the Death of the Lady had not put an end to his Hopes of rising that way;
for after her Decease, being out of Place, he had no Thought or Ambition of
going into any way of getting his Bread but by being a Servant; so that being
nimble, and light of Body, he practiced running, thinking to get a running
Footman's Place with some Person of Quality, when I (says Jonathan) happened to
meet with him, and thinking it a pity that such Parts should be buried and lost
to the World, I took him into my Protection, and I warrant you will see him
preferred one Time or other.

But though it is some Years since this Thing happened, I was, not long since,
informed by Jonathan that the Beau is still alive, that he made a considerable
Figure at the last Installment at Windsor, being the Person who took the Lady M
-- n's Diamond Buckle; that when her Ladyship applied to Jonathan for the
Recovery of it, he asked her how much she would give; she answered twenty
Guineas; Z -- nds, Madam, says he, you offer nothing, it cost the Gentleman who
took it forty for his Coach, Equipage, and other Expenses to Windsor.

Jonathan gave us to understand, that these Gentleman often visited the Bath,
Tunbridge, and Epsom, not staying long in a Place, but going from one to the
other, and always thrusting themselves into the best Company; their Business
there was to get Watches and Snuff Boxes, and whenever there happened a Crowd
on the Walks, or in the long Rooms, then it is these Gentlemen work; and if the
Things should happen to be missed while they are in the Room, the Figure they
make carries them off without being suspected; but as has been before observed,
for fear of Accidents, there must be a Footman, not only for State, but for
Use, who to prevent the Consequences of a search, receives the Booty from the
Master as soon as the Work is done, and conveys it to some Place of Safety.

The Footman in his Way is a Person of as great Service to the Commonwealth of
Thieves as the Master; he is to insinuate himself into the Acquaintance of all
the Servants wherever he goes; from them he is to learn all the Circumstances
and Affairs of their respective Masters and Mistresses; -- as what Plate they
bring with them to those Places of Pleasure, when they remove to Town, or to
any other Place, and how they go attended, which are very material Advices; for
Intelligence is sent of all these Things to Jonathan, who takes care to have
them spoke with upon the Road, if it be feasible and safe; the Footman is also
to endeavor to corrupt some of the Servants he converses with, and if they are
Fellows who love Mirth and good Company, they are often delighted with these
Fellows, who study to please; and they are by all means to come acquainted with
the Servant Maids who live in good Families, and to make Love to some one of
them; by these Means they not only become acquainted with the Situation of the
House, and know where all the Plate and other rich Movables are kept; but if
one of the Damsels should happen to be captivated with the Person of Mr. John,
or Mr. Thomas, or whatever Name he takes, she may be wrought upon to let him in
at Night, and so a good Prize may be got with little Hazard and Danger.

Jonathan told us the World was grown so peery, (that was his Term for sharp)
that ingenious Men (meaning Thieves) must have Recourse to Stratagems, or else
they could not get Bread; for (says he) there are not so many Opportunities of
working, as heretofore, there are such a damned Number of poor People more than
formerly, that are not worth robbing, and those that have made them poor, and
got their Money, take so much care to keep it, and are so well guarded, that it
is very difficult to come at them; downright robbing, or your chance Jobs are
not worth a Farthing; and I may say without Vanity, that if it had not been for
the Confederacy I have formed, the Business would have come to nothing; but let
them be as cautious and as cunning as they will, we'll be more cunning than
they -- I Will tell you a Stratagem of some of the Gentlemen, I have the Honor
to command -- There were a parcel of rich Citizens, who took a singular
Pleasure in ringing Bells; one Day in the Week they met and dined together, and
passed the rest of the Day in ringing; in Summer Time they traveled from Place
to Place wherever they heard of a good Ring of Bells, in order to divert
themselves with ringing, and to try where were the sweetest Bells -- One of our
Gentry found Means of getting into their Company; and one Night when they were
pretty warm with Wine, and boasting of their great Excellence in ringing; our
Spark offered, that he and five more he would bring should ring with them for
two hundred Guineas, provided he was to name the Bells; they took him up
immediately, and entered into Articles under the Forfeiture of an hundred
Pounds to those that should fail, who named Lincoln Cathedral, where they
agreed to meet by a certain Day.

Our Citizens set out, some in their own Coaches, and some on Horseback with
two hundred Guineas for their Wager, and each of them Money besides for
Expenses; and our Spark with his Confederates met them very punctually -- The
Citizens immediately stripped themselves, in order to put on their ringing
Dresses, consisting of Drawers, Wastcoats and Caps; and while they were
beginning to try the Bells, one of our People conveyed away their Clothes; when
the rest saw him safe out, they stole off, and mounted their Horses, which were
ready, and left the Citizens to enjoy all their Music themselves -- This
Expedition was worth near three hundred Pounds in Money; for all they carried
was in their Breeches Pockets; I say three hundred Pounds, besides Watches,
Snuff Boxes, Tobacco Boxes, Clothes, and Perriwigs.

We owned to Jonathan, that this Affair was well projected, and as well
executed: Oh, says he, this is nothing to what has been done; for one of our
People once stole a House of six Rooms on a Floor, and an hundred and fifty
Pounds a Year Rent.

As this appeared to be a kind of Rhodomontade, we desired Mr. Wild to let us
know how that could be done; and he being very communicative in his Temper,
told us the Story: A Gentleman had fitted up a House in Queen's-Square, in a
very handsome Manner, expecting to let it to some foreign Minister, or English
Person of Quality; which as soon as 'twas ready, I equipt a Fellow, who had
proved himself a Man fit for Business, in a plain neat Suit, gold-headed Cane,
Snuff Box, etc. a good Chariot, with two other Rogues for Footmen: This
supposed Gentleman calls upon the Landlord, and offers to treat with him for
the Hire of his House, which he said, if he liked his Terms, he would take a
Lease of for twenty one Years; whereupon the Bargain was struck, and in few
Days the Leases were drawn, the Rent to be paid at half yearly Payments; and
the Furniture was promised by the Squire to be brought in the Wednesday
following.

The Week after the Landlord calls at the House to see his new Tenant, in order
to promote a more intimate Acquaintance, but finds no Body there but a shabby
old Man, and not one piece of Furniture; but on the contrary, two or three of
the Marble Chimney Pieces and Slabs taken down: He enquires of the old Man the
meaning of it, who told him his Master ordered it, for he did not like the
Fashion of 'em, and was pleased to have them altered. The Landlord swore and
stormed like a Madman, bid him get out of the House, and vowed neither he nor
his Master should have any thing to do there; but at length was pacified upon
his assuring him his Master designed nothing but what was honorable, and would
make him all the Satisfaction he could desire; and that the next Day at Noon he
would come himself and direct what he would have done: Whereupon he went away,
but not very well pleased you may be sure; and returning the next Day as the
Fellow had appointed, he meets some Men at the Door, carrying out two
Chimney-Glasses, and several Pictures that had been, fixed to the Pannels over
the Chimney-Pieces, which he stopped; but the Squire happening himself to be in
the House, but without his Chariot or Footmen, required to know by what
Authority he stopped the Goods from going where he sent them? Why Sir, says the
Landlord, are they not my own? What, would you pull my House down before my
Face, and send it G -- knows where? why is not your own Furniture brought home
as you appointed? Sir, says the Tenant, I have had two Children sick of the
Smallpox, which hindered me from moving so soon as I expected, but tomorrow
some of my Goods will be here. But what are you doing, replies the Landlord,
with these that you send away? Why, says he, I am for fitting up Things
according to my own Fancy, and I don't matter the Expense of it; for as I alter
the Chimney-Pieces to another Form, the Glasses must be made to answer them,
and the Frames of the Pictures I shall have made wider, to square with the
Glasses. When I fitted up this House, says the Landlord, I thought it might
have served any Man of Quality in the Kingdom. That might be, said the Squire
again, I Will have Things done agreeable to my own Humor, for all that: When
your Rent's due I Will pay it; and when my Lease is expired, I shall leave the
House in as good Condition as I have found it.

The Landlord finding it in vain to oppose him, and withal that he had promised
that some of his Goods would certainly be brought to the House the next Day;
which he hoped would be some Security for what he might possibly suffer by the
Alterations the Tenant was making, he waited till then, and came again to the
House; but was still more provoked, to see that all the Furniture that was
brought, consisted of two old Chairs and a Table, not worth half a Crown; and
they had in the mean time been so expert in making the Alterations, (as they
called it) that they had took down a very fine new Staircase, and the Wainscot
of the best Room. Whereupon the Landlord, finding himself really tricked,
arrests the Tenant in an Action of 500 l. But I got my Gentleman bailed, and
ordered my Attorney to summon the Plaintiff before a Judge, to show Cause of
Action; which he failing to do, was obliged to take common Bail: But this not
answering his Purpose, (for in reality the Defendant owed him nothing) the
Landlord files a Bill in the Exchequer; upon which the Tenant prefers a cross
Bill, obliging him to answer to several Points, particularly the Letting the
House to him; which as he could not deny, the Landlord's Bill was dismissed
with Costs of Suit; and the Suit at Common Law went against him also, by
Default: And the Tenant going to work again upon the Premises, the Landlord
thought fit to make Overtures of Agreement; viz. That upon a Surrender of his
Lease, and giving up the Possession of the House, in the Condition it was then
in, he would pay all his Charges, and release him from all Damages whatsoever:
Which, since there was no more to be got, by my Consent, the Terms were
accepted of; and so the Landlord, besides a Year and a half's Rent, sat down at
400 l. Loss. Which I suppose will make him take a little more Care how he lets
his Houses.

At one time the stealing Shopkeepers Account-Books was grown a considerable
Branch of Trade; of which Jonathan gave us one Instance, which is worth
relating.

A Merchant, a considerable Dealer in Hops, in Thames Street, had his Books
stole; and applying to me, offered ten Guineas to have them restored: The
Prigs, says he, were in my Ken, that nim'd 'em out of his Swag. To explain this
Language, it means, that the Thieves were then in his House, that stole them
out of the Shop. But to go on with the Story in plain Terms; Jonathan went into
the Room where they were, and made the Report; but they sitting in Council,
with two or three others of the same Squadron, though not in that Detachment,
declared that they thought the Books were really worth twenty, that is, to
return to the Owners; which Jonathan notify'd to the Merchant: But in short,
the Agreement was fifteen. But then arose a Dispute about the Delivery;
Jonathan proposed that he should leave the Money behind him, and the Books be
brought to his House; which he scrupling, Jonathan said to him, Sir, do you
question my Honor? I scorn to do an ill thing by any Man. No, Sir, answered
he, by no means; and then readily laid down the Money, and went his Way: And
before he got home himself, the Books were at his House. Which serves to show
how far Jonathan's Honor was to be depended on.

Within three Weeks the same Gentleman came to Jonathan's House upon the very
same Business, for his Shop-Books were gone again; and he would fain have had
five Guineas bated this time, because of his having been a Customer before; but
Jonathan said, 'twas nothing to him: If the Gentleman, says he, will take five
Shillings, I shall agree to it. So, in short, he paid down his Money, like a
fair Dealer, and was going home, as before; but Jonathan called him back, and
asked him how; and in what part of his Shop, his Counting House was built? He
told him 'twas next the Street, and the Door opened within-side, behind the
Counter. Why, says Jonathan, you are quite wrong, you will never keep your Books,
if that is the Case: But I Will come to Morrow my self, and see it, and then I Will
advise you what is proper to be done.

The next Day Jonathan comes to Thames Street (the Books having been sent
before) and meets with the Merchant at home; He takes a Survey of the whole
Affair, and advises the old Counting House to be pulled down, and a new one to
be erected at the farther End of the Shop, and to break out a Sky-light over
head; this, he said, would be the only Contrivance to make all safe: Which was
done according to Jonathan's Model; and yet hardly a Month happened before it
was again attacked with the like Success, and cost him the same Sum over again,
to get it out of Jonathan's Purgatory. The Manner of the Adventure is as
follows: A Gentleman well dressed, watched his Opportunity, and came into the
Shop, and asked if Mr. -- was at home? Whereupon he was told that he himself
was the Person. Sir, says he, I have two or three Words to speak with you in
private; and so walks him toward his Counting House: The Hop-merchant goes in
first, expecting the Gentleman would have followed, in order to declare his
Business to him there; but instead of that, he only reaches out his Hand to the
Desk, upon which the abovementioned Books lay, and takes them away, and at the
same instant shuts to the Door, locks it upon the Hop-Dealer, and walks off
very leisurely.

Jonathan about this time had one of his best Hands deserted him, and yet the
Fellow still did Business, as Mr. Wild found by his Books and the Accounts that
came in. Jonathan's Clerk minuted down a Gold Watch, a pair of Diamond
Earrings, with several other Things of less value, which were made, that is,
stole in their Language, by this Fellow, and yet he had missed several Musters;
and Jonathan, nor any of his People, had heard one syllable of him for above
three Months, any otherwise than that such and such Things were spoke with,
which he knew must be by the Devil or this Rascal, he said, therefore 'twas
time to take him off: Whereupon Jonathan was continually upon the hunt for him,
but as he kept Company with no other of the Profession, it was a difficult
Matter for his Master to get Intelligence of him without his grand Master's
Assistance; but whether the Devil did really put it into his Servant Jonathan's
Head, or what other way he found it out, I cannot say; but true it is, that at
length he got certain Information where he then lodged.

Mr. Wild had my Lord Chief Justice's Warrant in his Pocket, so taking two or
three Constables with him, about four in the Morning he beset the House, which
was in Bishopsgate-street, the Corner of -- street, a Publick-House; Jonathan
headed the Posse, with a Pistol in each Hand, and up Stairs he goes to his
Room, though not so silently, but that he heard them upon the Stairs, and
therefore he gets up, and puts on his Breeches, Shoes, and Stockings; by that
time Jonathan had wrench'd open the Door (for it was locked within side) upon
sight of whom, he gave a spring out of the Window, which was one Story high,
and came down into a little Yard, from thence leaped over a Wall into the
Street, and ran cross the Way into a Linen-Draper's House, whose Door happened
to stand open. At that time the Servants of the House were washing below
Stairs, to whom the Fellow begs for Protection; for that he was pursued by
Bailiffs, and if he should be taken, he must be inevitably ruined and undone.
The poor credulous Women pitied the Man's Case, and told him, he should stay
with them till the Blood-sucking Villains were gone. To return to Jonathan and
the Constables, as soon as they saw their Man fly out of the Window, you may be
sure they were not long behind him; but as much Haste as they made down Stairs,
they saw not the least Shadow of him, neither in the Yard, or in the Street,
which prodigiously surpised them all: But Jonathan peer'd about, being
satisfied, his Motion from the Window was downwards, therefore he must have
taken House somewhere; and, at last, spied this Linen-Draper's Door open; he
goes over, acquaints the Gentleman with what had happened, and assures him, the
Rogue could be no where but in his House: He said, he had seen no such Person,
and that he had not been from the Shop above a Minute. Sir, says Jonathan, that
was the very time he slipped in; give me leave to search for him. Which being
granted, he went into the Wash-house, where, for a good while, they denied they
saw any such Person, till being informed he was no Debtor, but a Highwayman and
Housebreaker, they owned the Matter, and told Mr. Wild, the Man he looked for
was in the Coal-hole under the Stairs; whereupon he takes a Candle, calls all
his Myrmidons about him, and into the Coal-hole he goes, but no Highwayman was
there; then he searches round the Cellar, Kitchen, and in short, every Place
where he thought a Man could be concealed, but no Body was to be seen. Jonathan
owned he never was so foiled in all the Course of his Practice before; he came
up and told the Master of the House there was no Body there; the Washer-women
were frightened out of their Wits, believing they had seen a Spirit, and all
looked very foolish upon one another, till the Linen-Draper gave them to know,
that if any Man went down Stairs, he must be there still, for he was sure no
Body had come up from thence, he having staid in Sight ever since, and then
persuaded Jonathan to go down again, and look into all the Washing-Tubs, and
search every Place over again; for there is, says he, no other Way to get out,
but up these Stairs, and so into the Street.

Mr. Wild was prevailed upon at last, and he and the Constables, with his Guard
de Corpse, re-descended, and finding one of the Tubs standing Bottom upwards,
they turned that up, as the Gentleman had put it into their Heads, and there
they found poor Culprit. Jonathan had no Patience, but flew upon him like a
Tiger. You treacherous Dog, said he, where are the Diamond Earrings, and
Gold-Watch you stole at such a Place? G -- d -- n me, you Villain, you cheating
Son of a Whore, I Will hang you, if there is never another Rogue in England, you
vile Rascal.

We must remark here, that though Jonathan in the main used to talk up the
Gentlemen of his Game, to be generally bright clever Fellows; yet when he was
angry with some of them, he would own there were Scoundrels of the Profession.

Notwithstanding this Bounce of Jonathan's, the Prisoner understood how to
soften this Machiavel^s Temper; and thereupon whispered him to go up to his
Lodging, and look behind the Head of the Bed, which Jonathan did, telling the
People of the House, he must go up Stairs for the Fellow's Clothes, which he
brought down along with him, and in a Hole where the Thief directed him to, he
found a gold Watch, two silver ones, Rings, and other Things of Value, which he
put into his own Pocket, for any Body else would not have known what to have
done with them; and the Prisoner being carried before the Justice, was
committed on Suspicion of Felony, and the next Sessions no Body appearing
against him, he was discharged.

The Success that Jonathan went on with in his Business, rendered him famous
all over London; and he made use of several little Arts to make himself appear
considerable to distant Parts of the Kingdom, particularly by some Printers of
Newspapers, and Dying-Speeches, whom he prevailed on to give him a Character
therein, in which he was generally styled THIEF-CATCHER-GENERAL OF
GREAT BRITAIN. His House was handsomely furnished, and set out with Plate,
Pictures, etc. and when his Wife appeared abroad, it was generally with a
Footman in a fine laced Livery. He kept a Country House, dressed well, and in
Company affected an Air of Grandeur. A little before his Catastrophe he
promised me a Haunch or a Side of Venison whenever I pleased to send to him,
saying, he had two Parks at his Command, well stocked with Deer.

The Wealth that he was supposed to have amassed by this Business, made several
Persons look upon him with Envy; and some well enough acquainted in the Roguish
Arts, attempted to set up against him a few Years ago; the Principal were, one
Felt -- n, a superannuated Thief, Riddlesd -- n an Attorney and Thief, whose
chief Merit for the Support of his Pretensions to this Practice, was, his
having sacrilegiously and feloniously broke open the Royal-Chapel at
White Hall, and stole thence the Communion-Plate, and Mr. H -- n, City Mar --
l. This last, and Jonathan, wrote Pamphlets against each other, as it was the
Custom then between great Men; but Jonathan laying himself too open, H -- n
dropped the Pen, and took up the Cudgels of the Law, with which he banged
Jonathan, so that he thought fit to buy his Peace at the Price of a Sum of
Money.

However, none of them all was able to give Jonathan any notable Disturbance in
his Office; on the contrary, he found Means soon after to get Riddle -- n
transported for not complying with the Conditions of his Pardon, to make Felt
-- n run mad, and H -- n entirely to quit his Pretensions.

Wherefore he turned himself again to his Business. -- And, as we were
enumerating how many Species of Thieves he had under his Command, we shall
resume that Part of our Story.

There were another Sort of Gentry under his Command, whose Business it was to
loiter about the Streets in the Daytime; and as Servants, who go of short
Errands to a Chandler's Shop, or Baker's, are apt to leave the Door a jar, (as
they call it) they were to whip in, and seize upon the next Thing that was
portable, and bring it off. They generally peeped in, to see that no Body was
in the Fore-Parlours, and if by Chance any Body should surprise them, they were
ready to enquire if some Person with a strange Name did not live there; though it
seldom falls out so, because they generally do their Business in a Minute.

These Sort of People sometimes go in Liveries, and sometimes dressed like
Ticket Porters with Silver Badges either upon their Coats, or about their
Necks; one of them some Time since whipped into a House in King Street, near
Long-Acre, which is divided into Tenements, the People furnishing their own
Lodgings, and going directly up two pair of Stairs, from whence he saw a Woman,
who inhabited it, come down; he easily put back the Lock, and finding nothing
in the Room of any Value, except the Bedding, he tied it all up, and was
carrying it off, when the Owner happened to meet him at the lower End of the
Stairs, and asking him where he was carrying that Bedding? He answered, without
Hesitation, that he brought it from Mr. -- the Upholsterer, and was carrying it
to such a one, but I find they don't live here. Oh! says the Woman, they live
at next Door; thank you, Mistress, says the Fellow; and before she got up
Stairs, to find it was her own Bedding, he had got into a Hackney Coach, and
carried it safe off.

These People sometimes went disguised like Chairmen in great Coats and
Harness, and a couple of them meeting together, stole the young Duchess of
Marlborough's Chair, as her Grace was visiting at Mrs. H -- n's in Piccadilly,
her Chairmen and Footmen being gone to a neighboring Alehouse; one of her
Servants thought immediately of applying to Mr. Wild, who told him, that if he
would leave ten Guineas, he might have the Chair the next Day; the Man made
some Difficulty of leaving the Money beforehand, but Mr. Wild told him he was
a Man of Honor, and scorned to wrong him, and indeed his Character was by this
Time established as a Man that dealt honorably in his Way; so that the Man
ventured at last to leave the Money; wherefore Mr. Wild bid him direct the
Dutchess's Chairmen to attend the Morning Prayers at Lincoln's- Inn-Chapel, and
there they should find the Chair; which the Fellows did accordingly, and they
found the Chair, with the Crimson Velvet Cushions and Damask Curtains all safe,
and unhurt.

And it must be observed, that whenever Jonathan obliged the Parties to leave
the Money beforehand, he very punctually complied with the Terms of Agreement,
as to the Delivery of the Goods; for one of his common Sayings was, that
Honesty was the best Policy.

He frequently drew out Detachments of some of his cleverest Fellows, whom he
sent out upon Command to Country Fairs; upon which Occasion he generally
marched out himself, for indeed the Service could not be well carried on
without him; for the common People seeing Jonathan there, were the more
careless; because he always gave out, that he came to take some Rogues whom he
suspected to be there, and the People had a Notion that his Presence frightened
away the Thieves; and to countenance this Belief, he went doubly and trebly
armed, and often wore Armor under his Clothes, which he took care to show in
all Companies; being attended by three or four, and sometimes half a Dozen
terrible looking Fellows by way of Guard du Corpse, as if all Thieves in England
had vowed to sacrifice him.

This Grimace took very well, for it gave him an Opportunity of protecting and
carrying off the Booty which was made in these Fairs; and if any of his Party
was in Danger of being taken, these Myrmidons of his, who passed for his Body
Guard, were to run into the Crowd, and under pretense of assisting the People,
who were about to seize such Rogues, were to try to shuffle off, and favor
their Escape.

In fine, his Business in all Things was to put a false Gloss upon Things; and
to make Fools of Mankind (which was his own Expression;) yet, when he had a
Mind to be merry, to drink his Bottle, and to laugh at the World, he talked
with too much Freedom of himself, and his own Management, and not without some
Vanity; of which there are a thousand Instances: We shall give one, because it
is short -- A certain Tradesman, a very honest Man, though of Jonathan's
Acquaintance, going into a Tavern, where he expected to meet some Company, by
Mistake went in where Jonathan was drinking with some merry Fellows; the
Tradesman was about to draw back, but Jonathan pressed him to sit down and take
a Glass with them; the Tradesman was a little angry with Jonathan for the
following Reason; about a Week before passing through a Country Fair, he saw
Jonathan a Horseback, and asking him how he did, Jonathan damned him, and bid
him not trouble him with impertinent Questions; therefore, the Tradesman
desired to know the Reason why Jonathan snapp'd him up in that rude angry
Manner, when he had spoke to him so civilly? Z -- ds, says Jonathan, you
disturbed me in my Business, for I had at that Time twenty Pair of Hands at
Work.

And indeed, he employed Hands in all sorts of Works; so that according to the
Author of the Fable of the Bees, he was a great Benefactor to Trade; for as
some of our News Papers have observed, he kept in Pay many Artists for the
altering of Watches and Rings; so he also kept a kind of Magazine, or Armory,
of all kind of Instruments used in Thievery, as Picklocks, Files, Saws, and
Engines for forcing Doors, Windows, etc. which he made no Secret of showing,
pretending he found them upon such and such House-breakers whom he had taken
and convicted, though it is certain he did not suffer them to grow rusty for want
of Use; for he never went into a House, but like an Engineer, he would view on
which side it might be attacked with the most Advantage, and he knew better
Things, than to send his Men upon Actions without Arms.

Sometimes Jonathan spoke in the Style of a Prince; as when the Son of Mrs.
Knap, who was murdered by a Footpad, near Gray's-Inn-Wall, went to him, to
desire his Assistance in taking the Murderer, and putting ten Guineas in his
Hand for his Encourgement, with a Promise of forty more when the Work should be
done; Jonathan answered him gravely, he might depend he would produce the
Villian; for, says he, I never pardon Murder -- and indeed he was as good as
his Word, for he seized the Fellow at the Jeruasalem Tavern in Clerkenwell, and
he was hanged the Sessions following.

Whilst he went on with this Tide of Success, and seemed to carry the World
before him, an ill Wind arose, which blew from a certain Corner of the Law, and
which seemed to threaten the Overthrow of his Commonwealth -- For Sir W -- m T
-- son observing what Mischiefs arose from the Practice of receiving stolen
Goods, and returning them again to the Proprietors for such Sums of Money as
the Receiver and Proprietor agreed upon, which Money no doubt must be divided
betwixt the Receiver and Thief; thought of putting an end to it, by bringing a
Bill into the House of Commons, for the more effectual transporting of Felons,
and for preventing Burglaries and Felons, in which among other Things was the
following Clause.

"And whereas there are several Persons who have secret Acquaintance with
Felons, and who make it their Business to help Persons to their stolen Goods,
and by that means gain Money from them, which is divided between them and the
Felons, whereby they greatly encourage such Offenders: Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That wherever any Person takes Money or Reward,
directly or indirectly, under Pretense or upon Account of helping any Person or
Persons to any stolen Goods or Chattles, every such Person so taking Money or
Reward as aforesaid, (unless such Person do apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended, such Felon who stole the same, and cause such Felon to be brought
to his Trial for the same, and give Evidence against him) shall be guilty of
Felony, and suffer the Pains and Penalties of Felony, according to the Nature
of the Felony committed in stealing such Goods, and in such and the same Manner
as if such Offender had himself stole such Goods and Chattels, in the Manner
and with such Circumstances as the same were stolen."

We are well informed, that after this Act had passed the R -- r was pleased to
send for Wild to admonish him, and let him know the Danger and Hazard of
pursuing the same Course of Life any longer, and recommended to him to detect
Rogues and bring them to Justice; promising upon that Condition, to give him
all Encouragement, reminding him of what considerable Sums he had got that Way
already, by which he might judge that he might get sufficient to keep him by
doing good Service to the Public, and living honestly.

Whether these good Admonitions, or the Fear of this new Law, wrought upon his
Conscience, is uncertain; but there was a sudden Damp put upon all his
Business, his Books were shut up for some Weeks, and he grew so abstemious,
that he refused several Sums offered him for the Recovery of things stolen --
Yet, he did not break off all Acquaintance and Correspondence with his old
Friends and Allies, the Thieves; on the contrary, having the Command of some
Money he gave them some small Matters (just what he pleased) for what Old Nick
had sent them in their Way, and deposited the Goods up in a Wareheouse.

In the mean time, all Wild's Acquaintance were inquisitive to know what he
intended to turn himself to; for they took it, for granted, that this new Act
had quite cut him out of his former Business; having a Notion that he was too
cunning ever to venture himself within the Clutches of the Law. -- Wherefore he
talked of a new Project; which was, for setting up a Policy, and opening an
Office for taking in Subscriptions for insuring against Robbery; pretending to
settle a sufficient Fund, and give good Security for the Performance of
Articles; sometimes showing a manuscript Paper of Proposals, and consulting
People whom he supposed to have any Understanding in those Affairs, extolling
the great Use and Advantage this Project would be to the Public; not doubting,
he said, but that all Trading People, as well as Gentlemen and Noblemen, who
kept great Quantities of Plate in their Houses, would for their own sakes
encourage so useful an Undertaking; bragging that it was no South-Sea-Bubble,
and that he could fairly make a great Fortune by it.

Whether he gave out this Report only to amuse People, and to hinder them from
enquiring any farther into his Affairs; or whether he was in earnest, and
thought to bring it to bear, I cannot tell; but the Thing was generally received
as a Banter, or as a Piece of Mr. Wild's Wit, and no farther Steps were taken
in it.

It was about this time, that he projected the carrying on a Trade to Holland
and Flanders; and thereupon purchased a Sloop, and put in one Roger J -- son to
command her, who had long been one of Jonathan's clever Fellows. He carried
over Gold Watches, Rings, Plate, and now and then a Bank or Goldsmith's Note,
that had been spoke with by the way of the Mail. His chief Trading Port was
Ostend, where he is particularly well known; from thence he usually traveled
up to Bruges, Ghent, Brussels, and other great Towns, where he brought his Toys
and Jewels to Market, and then returned to his Sloops took in a Lading of
Hollands, and other Goods, and came back to the River of Thames.

It is not to be expected that Jonathan and Roger would let any one share in
the Profits of such an honorable Profession: It would have been inconsistent
with their Practice, who never paid for any thing, to pay Custom; that would
have been reflected upon as idle and foolish: No, the Cargoe came generally
safe to Land the first Night; and at a certain House within forty Miles of
Newington-Buts, most Part of the dark Business was acted; where Councils were
secretly held, and the Projects formed. But I hope from what has happened, some
Persons who are well known, will have Prudence to take Warning, since I can
assure them that their Actions are sifting into by Persons of no small
Penetration, and whom they are not entire Strangers to.

But to return from this Digression, Roger drove on the Business
abovementioned but two Years, which was owing to an Accident that he himself
was the Occasion of: It happened, that by some Negligence or other, two Pieces
of Holland were lost in the shipping them for England, which, when he arrived,
he stopped out of his Mate's Wages, making him pay for the whole Loss. This so
provoked the Mate, that he went immediately and gave Information of Jon -- n's
running such Quantities of Goods. Whereupon the Vessel was exchequer'd in the
River, and he was obliged to stand a Trial with the King, in which he was cast
in 700 l. Damages; and so his Trade was put an End to in that particular Way.

This Stop brought Jonathan again to Consideration; he soon missed his Returns
from Ostend, and having three Wives living, and always a Seraglio of
Mistresses, no less than half a dozen at a time, to maintain, according to his
Rank; and being frequently importuned and teased by People who had been robbed,
to help them to their Goods, he ventured to dabble a little again; but with
great Caution, and for none but such as he took to be Men of Honor; every now
and then bringing in an Offering to the Gallows of some idle Rascal who did not
mind his Business, and who, according to his Notions, was fit for nothing but
hanging.

Finding no bad Consequence to proceed from his new Practice, it made him
bolder and bolder, so that he began to think he might go on as before, and that
he should be connived at; in a small time carrying on his Trade with very
little Caution, he went publicly down to the late Instalment at Windsor,
accompanied by his Lady Madam Wild, attended by a couple of Footmen in laced
Liveries; and the Detachment, he commanded down upon that Occasion, made as
good a Figure, both for Dress and Equipage, as any People there.

As there was a very great Booty brought off safe from that Expedition, Mr.
Wild had more than ordinary Court made to him by People of Fashion of both
Sexes, who solicited hard to have their Jewels, Watches, etc. returned upon a
reasonable Composition; and his open Way of treating upon this Occasion was the
most impudent thing he ever did in Contempt of the late Act -- He proceeded fo
far as to break off with several People, because they would not come up to his
Terms; and he considerably advanced the Price of stolen Goods; for whereas at
first he took no more for any thing of Plate than its Value in Weight, now he
would make People pay something for the Fashion also, otherwise they should
never have them; intending to send them over to Holland, where they might come
to a better Market. --

Yet no Prosecution followed all these daring Proceedings; which made him
think, no doubt, that he could do any thing; yet he had not long ago a narrow
Escape, as we shall show by the following Relation.

Jonathan, sitting one Day at an Inn in Smithfield, observed a large Trunk in
the Yard, and imagining there might be some Things of Value therein, he
immediately went home, and ordered one Rann, a notorious Acquaintance, to habit
himself like a Porter, and to endeavor to speak with it: Rann obeys his
Master's Commands, and accordingly succeeds. The Trunk belonged to Mr. Jarvis,
a Whip-maker in that Neighborhood, who was sending it down to a Dealer in the
Country. There was in it a great Quantity of rich Linen, and other Things for a
Wedding. Upon Mr. Jarvis's applying to Wild, after many Delays, he had most of
the Goods again for ten Guineas. But soon after Wild and Rann falling out, he
got him hanged. And the Day before his Execution, he sent for Mr. Jarvis, and
related to him the above Particulars: But Mr. Jarvis dying soon after, Jonathan
had the good Luck to hear no more of the Matter.

But now it being decreed by Providence, that Jonathan should reign no longer,
he was infatuated to do a Thing which brought on his Destruction -- Certain
Persons having Information where a considerable Quanty of rich Goods lay,
supposed to be stolen, obtained a Warrant for the Seizure of them; which was
accordingly done: Though Jonathan did not go and claim the Goods as his own, he
had the Assurance to take out an Action, in the Name of Roger Johnston, to whom
he pretended the Goods belonged, and arrested the Person or Persons who seized
them. Thus he pretended to recover those Goods by Law, for possessing which (if
they were found upon him) the Law would hang him --

A Proceeding so barefaced and impudent, put certain Persons upon finding out
Means of bringing so sturdy a Rogue to Justice; Jonathan was threatened loud,
which occasioned a Report all over the Town, that he was fled from Justice;
upon which Occasion, he published a bullying Advertisement in some of the News
Papers, offering a Reward of ten Guineas to any Person who should discover the
Author of such a scandalous Report; at the same Time he run into all public
Places to show himself, and let the World see that he was not run away as was
reported -- Yet, in the midst of all this blustering he was seized and
committed to Newgate.

There are some other Circumstances in this Story, but as we had it only from
his own Mouth, that he was malicious against the Persons concerned, and
endeavored to asperse them, we shall say no more of it.

How far Roger John -- n was concerned with Wild at the Time of his
Apprehension, I leave the World to judge, when immediately upon his being
committed to Newgate, an Express was sent over, and John -- n, with another of
the Trade, came down to Ostend, and appeared like Persons of Quality, told the
News to all about him, and swore he would hang both Jonathan and the B -- who calls
her self his Wife; so he takes a Packet and hires her for Dover, where he
arrived: But as he has hot appeared publicly in London, we may very well
suppose that the hanging of them was the least Part of his Business.

We cannot forbear observing something remarkable in the Fate of this Fellow;
first, that he had Opportunities of escaping after he knew that a Prosecution
was designed against him; and secondly, that the Fact for which he died, was
committed whilst he was a Prisoner in Newgate; for he was so blind, as to
imagine, that the taking but ten Guineas for the Recovery of the Lace, when the
Woman offered fifteen or twenty, and refusing to accept of any Thing for his
own Trouble, and also that palliating Speech he made her, that he did these
Things only to serve poor People who had been wronged, would have been
Circumstances in his Favor when he should come to be tried; not considering
that he directly by this Action incurred the Penalty of the Act of Parliament
before quoted; which is a Proof that all his former Cunning and Sagacity
forsook him, when he wanted it most, and makes good that Saying -- Quem Jupiter
vult perdere, dementat prius -- Jupiter first takes away the Understanding of
him whom he has a Mind to destroy.

I believe no Malefactor ever stood his Ground so long, committing every Day
acts of Felony in Sight of the World; so that I Have heard him compute, that in
fifteen Years he had received near ten thousand Pounds for his Dividend of
stolen Goods returned, living all this while in Riot and Voluptuousness.

But Vengeance at length overtook him, and from the Minute of his being seized,
his Sense and Resolution failed; nor was he spirited up by the Hopes of a
Reprieve, which some People endeavored to flatter him with, and industriously
spread such a Rumor about, whilst they were trembling, lest it should be so;
because, he and they are supposed to be no Strangers to each others Practices.

We shall not trouble the Readers with any Thing which has already been made
Public, concerning this extraordinary Fellow, who has made so much Noise in
the World; therefore we shall conclude, with observing that whoever had seen
him in the Gaiety of his Life, when all his Rogueries were successful; and had
also been Witness of his deplorable State of Mind after his Condemnation, might
have drawn a Lesson of Morality from it, which perhaps might have been of Use
to an Atheist.

I say, to have seen one remarkable for the Gaiety of his Temper, for a vast
Depth of Cunning, as well as Hardness and personal Courage, so changed at the
Apprehensions of his approaching Death, and the great Account which is to
follow; to have seen him under the greatest Distractions and Horrors of Mind,
that human Nature is capable of suffering, would be convinced, that Virtue only
can give true Tranquillity, and nothing can support a Man against the Terrors
of Death, but a good Conscience.

A true COPY of a Paper, written by JONATHAN WILD, on Saturday the 24th Day of
May, 1725, and designed to have been delivered by him at the Place of
Execution, to the Reverend Mr. Edwards; but was prevented by the Draught of
Opium he took the Night before his Death in the Condemned Hold of Newgate.
IT having pleased Almighty God in his Justice, to put an End to a most vicious
and wicked Course of Life, by a shameful and ignominious Death; the World will
expect some Account of my real Sentiments, and Behavior under so great a
Vicissitude.

Such as expect any extraordinary Discoveries and Confessions from me, will be
disappointed; for my Affairs are too much confused, and my Mind too sadly
perplexed to give me Room to satisfy the Curious in a particular Manner;
neither do I believe it would be of any public Advantage, except to some few
Printers and Publishers.

Let it suffice, that I have gone on in a long Series of dreadful Guilt, and no
Crime (Treason, Murder, and Sodomy excepted) escaped me; for which God's
Vengeance has now overtaken me. My rash Zeal to serve Mr. Johnson, by directing
an Action to be brought for the Recovery of his Effects, has facilitated my
Fate, and utterly undone me, by putting me into the Hands and Power of my
Enemies. That I had previous Notice of their Designs, and of Warrants being
issued against me, is too notorious to be contested; and I might have escaped
far enough out of their Reach many Times, if I had thought my self in any
Danger; but I am equally surprised with the rest of the World, who never
thought Matters could have been carried to this Height against me.

The Methods I took for to procure a Respite, and protract the Time of my
Execution, were no other than what is natural enough to poor Wretches under the
dreadful Sentence of Death, and what has been often practiced by Malefactors of
much greater Rank and Quality than my self. I mean my pretending to discover
the Persons that robbed the Exchequer; but the Government was wiser, and knew
better Things than to be imposed on by so mean and despicable a Criminal.

As Mr. Recorder was pleased at my Trial, to say that the Clause in the Act of
Parliament, by which I now fall, was directly levelled against me; and that
himself had frequently admonished me against acting in Contempt of the same. I
do not pretend to deny it; but presuming on the Services I did the Public, by
apprehending and bringing to Justice great Numbers of Robbers, at the apparent
Hazard of my Life; I hoped that Law might have been dispensed with, and those
Services balance the Inconveniences arising from my recovering stolen Goods;
and indeed it was upon this Foundation that I all along acted.

I return Thanks to my Neighbors and others, who did so readily attend at the
Sessions House to have testified for my Demeanor amongst them, if there had
been Occasion for it; and to all other Persons whatsoever who have assisted me
in my Misery, and wished well to me.

And particularly my dying Thanks to the Reverend Dr. Knight, the Reverend Mr.
Nicholson, and the Reverend Mr. Purney, for the great Comforts their Christian
Labors have brought to my Soul; and to all others who have charitably assisted
me to undergo this great Conflict with a Christian Fortitude.

The Reason I have to expect ill Treatment from the Poplulace, gives me much
Uneasiness, and strikes me with great Terror. The barbarous Insults I met with
from them after my receiving Sentence of Death at the Sessions House, I believe
were such, as never was shown before to a Person in my Circumstances, in no
Country upon Earth. I freely forgive them, and all the rest of my Enemies
whatsoever, hoping to meet with Forgiveness for all my enormous Crimes and
Offenses from the Great God of Mercy and Truth, whom I have broughout the whole
Course of my Life grievously offended. Lord have Mercy upon me. Lord receive me.

JONATHAN WILD.

FINIS.

