AN ACCOUNT OF THE AUTOMATON, CONSTRUCTED BY ORFFYREUS, etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Shortly will be Published, AN ESSAY ON MOTION: BEING AN INTRODUCTION TO A NEW
SYSTEM OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.

WHEREIN The Elementary principles assumed by Sir Isaac Newton, are
mechanically deduced from Elements still more general and simple.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE AUTOMATON, CONSTRUCTED BY ORFFYREUS: IN TWO LETTERS;

THE ONE, FROM PROFESSOR 'sGRAVESANDE, to Sir ISAAC NEWTON,

THE OTHER FROM BARON FISCHER, TO Dr. DESAGULIERS.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED THE TESTIMONIAL OF THE PRINCE OF HESSE CASSEL, IN FAVOR
OF ORFFYREUS'S MACHINE:

LIKEWISE ANIMADVERSIONS, BY PROFESSOR ALLAMAN OF LEYDEN, ON THE NEGLECT OF
THAT SINGULAR INVENTION;

WITH ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON IT IS UTILITY, RECONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT.

The invention all admired, and each how he
To be the inventor missed; so easy it seemed
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought
Impossible. --
MILTON. LONDON.

PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DCC.LXX.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE AUTOMATON, CONSTRUCTED BY ORFFYREUS, etc.
ORFFYREUS, a native of Saxony, was one of those singular genuises, whose
natural talents for particular arts are accompanied by a strange perversity of
understanding. He had an amazing turn for practical mechanics, and applied
himself to the discovery of a perpetual motion; a discovery as much exploded
among the mathematicians as that of the philosopher's stone among chemists.
Orffyreus, however, after laboring about twenty years and constructing near
three hundred different machines, at length hit on the contrivance of that
which is described in the following letters.

PROFESSOR 'sGRAVESANDE, to Sir ISAAC NEWTON.
LE Docteur Des Aguliers, vous aura sans doubt fait voir un lettre, que le
Baron Fischer lui a ecrite, il y a quelque tems, touchant la Roue d'Orffyreus,
que l'inventeur assure etre un mouvement perpetuel. Monseigneur le Landgrave a
voulu que j'examinasse aussi la machine. Ce prince qui aim les sciences and
les beaux arts, and qui, par le secours qu'il done a tous ceux qui s'y
attachent avec quelque succes, ne neg^ige aucune occasion de render utiles au
public les inventions qu'on lui ^resente, souhaiteroit de voir cette machine
connue de tout le monde (...) enter les mains de gens plus habiles que
l'inventeur, afin qu'on en ^etire l'utilite qu'on doit naturellement attendre
d'une invention aussi par^iculiere. J'ai cru, Monsieur, que vous ne seriez pas
fache d'avoir une relation un peu detaillee de ce qu'on observe dans une examen
exterieur d'une machine sur laquelle les sentiments sont si partagez, and qui a
presque tous les habiles mathematiciens contre elle. Un tres grand nombre
soutient l'impossibilite du mouvement perpetuel, d'ou est venu le peu
d'attention qu'on a fait a la machine d'Orffyreus. Je scai combien je suis
inferieur a ceux qui ont done leurs demonstrations sur l'impossibilite de ce
mouvement; cependant pour vous expliquer les sentiments avec lesquels j'ai
examine cette machine, j'aurai l'honneur de vous dire, qu'il y a environ 7 ans
que je crus decouvrir le paralogisme de ces demonstrations en ce qu'elles ne
peuvent etre applicables a toutes les machines possibles, and depuis je suis
toujours rest tres persuade, qu'on peut demontrer que le mouvement perpetuel
n'est pas contradictoire; and il m'aparu que Mr. Leibnitz avoit tort de
regarder comme un axiom l'impossibilite du mouvement perpetuel, ce qui sert
neanmoins de fondement a une party de sa Philosophy. Malgre cette persuasion
j'etois fort eloigne de croire qu'Orffyreus fut assez habile pour decouvrir le
mouvement perpetuel; je regardois ce mouvement comme ne devant etre decouvert,
qu'apres plusicurs autres inventions, au cas qu'il le fut jamais.

Depuis que j'ai examine la machine, je suis dans un etonnement que je ne
saurois exprimer. L'auteur a du genie pour les mechaniques, mais n'est rien
moins que profond mathematicien; cependant cette machine a quelque chose de
suprenant, quand meme de seroit une fourberie. Voici ce que regard la machine
meme, don't l'auteur ne laisse voir que l'exterieur, de peur qu'on ne lui vole
son secret. C'est un tambour d'environ 14 pouces d'epaisseur sur 12 pieds de
diametre; il est tres ledger, etant fait de quelques planches assemblees par
d'autres pieces de bois, de maniere qu'on verroit l'interieur de tous cotez,
sans une toil ciree qui couvre tout le tambour. Ce tambour est traverse d'un
axe d'environ 6 pouces de diametre, termine par les extremitez par des axes de
fer de 3 quarts de pouces, sur lesquelles la machine turn. J'ai examine ces
axes, and je suis tres persuade qu'il n'y a rien en dehors qui contribue au
mouvement de la machine. J'ai turn le tambour tres lentement, and il est
rest en repos, aussitot que j'ai retire la main; je lui ai fait fair un tour
ou deux de cette maniere: Ensuite, je l'ai fait mouvoir tant soit peu plus
vite, je lui ai fait fair de meme un tour ou deux mais alors j'etois oblige de
le retenir continu^llement; car l'ayant lache, il a pris en moins de 2 tours sa
plus grande celerite, de maniere qu'il a fait 25 a 26 tours dans une minute.
C'est Ie mouvement qu'il a conserve ci-devant pendant 2 mois dans une chamber
cachetee, dans laquelle il etoit impossible qu'il y eut aucune fraud. S. A.
Ser. fit ouvrir la chamber, and arreter la machine apres ce tems la, car comme
ce n'est qu'un essai, elle n'est pas assez forte pour que les materiaux ne
s'usent pas par une longue agitation. Monseigneur le Landgrave a ete present a
l'examen que j'ai fait de la machine. J'ai pris la liberte de demander a S. A.
Ser. qui a vu l'interieur du tambour, si lorsque la machine a ete agitee
pendant un certain tems, rien n'etoit change dans l'interieur; comme aussi s'il
n'y avoit pas quelques pieces dans lesquelles on pouvoit soupconner de la
fraud. S. A. Ser. m'assure que non, and que la machine est fort simple. Vous
voyez, Monsieur, que je n'en ai pas assez vu par moi-meme, pour assurer que
j'ai une demonstration, que dans cette machine le principe du mouvement, qui
est certainement dans le tambour, soit tell qu'il le faut pour render le
mouvement perpetuel; mais aussi je crois qu'on ne sauroit me nier d'avoir de
presomtions fortes en faveur de l'inventeur. Monseigneur le Landgrave a done
une recompense digne de sa generosite a Orffyreus, afin de voir le secret de la
machine, avec promise de ne point se servir du secret ni de le decouvrir, avaunt
que l'auteur en eut retire encore d'autres recompenses pour render son
invention public. Je scai tres bien, Monsieur, qu'il n'y a qu'en Angleterre
ou les sciences florissent assez, pour fair trouver a l'auteur une recompense
digne de son invention. Il s'agit simplement de la lui assurer, au cas que sa
machine soit un veritable mouvement perpetuel. L'auteur ne demand a toucher
l'argent, qu'apres que la machine aura ete examinee en dedans; on ne sauroit
raisonablement exiger cet examen avaunt la recompense promise. Comme il s'agit
d'une chose utile au public, and l'avancement de sciences, de decouvrir
l'invention ou la fraud, j'ai cru que cette relation ne vous seroit pas
desagreable. Je suis, etc.


THE letter from Baron Fischer, to Dr. Desaguliers, which is mentioned in the
preceding epistle, serves not only to confirm the foregoing particulars; but
contains several others omitted by Professor s'Gravesande. It is indeed
written, as Mr. Allaman justly observes, in very bad French, but is
sufficiently intelligible; and carries with it a proof of the author's being a
competent judge of the subject on which he writes Baron Fischer was architect
to the Emperor, and first introduced into Germany the steam engines, for
raising water.
.

BARON FISCHER, TO Dr. DESAGULIERS.
JE me done l'honneur de vous ecrire la present pour vous marquer l'estime
que j'ai pour vous, and aussi pour vous donner des nouvelles de ce mouvement
perpetuel de Cassel, que vous m'avez tant recommande pendant que je me trouvois
encore a Londres. Quoi que je sois fort incredule sur les chooses que je ne
scaurois comprendre, je dois pourtant vous assurer, que j'en suis tout a fait
persuade, puisque jene trouve aucune chose qui pourroit empecher de donner a
cette machine le nom de mouvement perpetuel, ou de soi-meme; mais j'ai bien des
raisons de croire, que c'en est un, selon l'experience que j'en ai faites a ma
volonte, and que son altesse serenissime m'a bien voulu permettre, qui est le
seigneur le plus aimable and gratieux, que j'ai connu de ma vie, and qui a eu
la patience de rester present aux epreuves, que je faisois pendant deux heures.
C'est une roue, qui a 12 pieds en diametre, elle est couverte d'une toil
ciree; a chaque tour de roue en entend environ 8 poids, qui tombent doucement
du cote que la roue se turn; cette roue march avec une vitesse etonnante,
faisant 26 tours par minute, quand la manivelle ou axe n'est point chargee de
quelque autre effort. Aiant apres attache une cord a l'axe, pour fair tourner
une vis d'Archimede, pour fair monter de l'eau; cette roue faisoit 20 tours
par minute, ce que j'ai conte plusieurs fois avec une montre a secondes; and
j'ai trouve toujours la meme regularite; j'ai arrete ensuite la roue avec bien
de la peine par plusieurs reprises des mains sur la circonference de cette
Roue, qui seroit capable d'elever un homme si on la vouloit arreter tout d'un
coup. L'aiant arretee de sort qu'elle restoit immobile, and c'est ici monsieur
la plus grande preuve d'un mouvement perpetuel, je lui ai done un mouvement
fort lent pour voir si elle pouvoit regagner sa premiere vitesse d'elle meme,
ce don't je doutois, aiant cru comme on le disoit a Londres, qu'elle ne faisoit
que conserver long tems le mouvement qu'on lui avoit imprime: mais a mon grand
ctonnement j'observai que cette Roue augmentoit sa vitesse peu-a-peu jusqu'a ce
qu'elle eut fait environ 2 tours, apres quoi elle avoit regagne toute la
vitesse, qu'elle avoit auparavant; ce que j'ai observe encore avec la montre a
secondes, and j'ai trouve de meme 26 tours par minute quand la Roue n'etoit pas
chargee, and 20 tours apres avoir attache la vis pour elever de l'eau* Cette
epreuve M. d'avoir vu augmenter la vitesse de cette Roue par elle-meme, jusqu'a
ce qu'elle fut egale a sa premiere ou ordinaire vitesse, apres une motion fort
lent que je lui ai done, me persuade plus que si j'avois vu marcher la Roue
pendant un an; ce qui ne m'auroit pas persuade d'un mouvement perpetuel, car il
auroit pu diminuer en quelque chose du premier mouvement done and cesser
tout-a-fait avec le tems, mais de gagner la vitesse au lieu d'en perdre, se
mettre dans sa vitesse ordinaire jusqu' a ce qu'elle a acquis un certain degree
pour se mettre egale avec la resistance de l'air and le frottement des axes, je
ne scai si on peut encore douter de la verite du fait. Je l'ai turn apres en
sens contraire, and la Roue faisoit le meme effet; j'examinai bien les axes de
cette Roue pour voir, s'il n'y avoit point d'artifice cache, mais on ne sauroit
voir la moindre chose que deux petits axes, ou la Roue est suspendue par son
center. Son altesse, qui possede toutes les qualites qu'un grand prince doit
avoir, faisoit toujours cette reflection gratieuse en faveur de l'auteur, de ne
se vouloir point servir de cette machine ou l'emploier a quelque chose, de peur
qu'on n'en decouvrit le secret avaunt que l'auteur en eut recu la recompense de
pais etrangers. Son altesse qui possede parfaitement les mathematiques,
m'assure que cette machine est si facile qu'un garcon de menuisier la sauroit
comprendre, and la fair apres avoir vu le dedans de cette Roue, and qu'il
n'auroit pas expose son nom en donnant des attestations, s'il n'avoit pas eu
connaisance de la machine. J'ai dit a son altesse, que je ne doutois pas, qu'on
ne put former une compagnie a Londres pour acheter le secret. Ce Prince en sera
content, si une tell compagnie veut consigner 20 milles pieces pour l'auteur
ou enter les mains de son altesse meme, ou en autre lieu de surete. Alors on
fera voir and examiner la machine and le secret, que si on le trouve un
mouvement perpetuel, les 20 mill pieces seront donnees a l'auteur; and, si
non, l'argent sera restitue, ce qui sera stipule par des ecrits and avec les
precautions necessaires. Je dis a son altesse serenissime, que person ne
pouroit animer une tell compagnie ou souscription mieux que vous, qui
travaillez toujours a l'instruction du public; considerez quelle obligation
l'on vous aura, si vous procurez la connoisance d'un principe de mouvement
perpetuel a la nation la plus eclairee de l'Europe, and que par la on pouroit
decouvrir une infinite de belles chooses qui ne nous sont pas encore connues,
comme les loix du mouvement, sans parler de l'utilite de la machine meme; comme
je ne puis pas toujours rester ici je vous pry tenir correspondance avec Mr.
Roman, surintendant des batimens de son altesse; qui montrera vos lettres a ce
Prince, and se pouroit entendre avec vous touchant cette affair, qui merit
bien qu'on y fasse des reflections pour ne pas laisser un tell tresor enterre,
and sans utilite; vous communiquerez aussi a votre ami le Chevalier Newton,
s'il vous plait, ce que je viens de vous avancer ici de ce mouvement. J'espere
qu'il vous sera certify par notre ami Mr. 'sGravesande de Leide, qu'on espere
de voir bientot dans ce pais pour fair une petit tour de promenade, and fair
sa reverence a son altesse Monseigneur; son altesse lui aiant fait ecrire par
Mr. Roman, qu'il voudroit bien le voir ici.

Je suis, etc.


THE TESTIMONIAL OF THE LANDGRAVE OF HESSE CASSEL, IN FAVOR OF ORFFYREUS'S
MACHINE.
TESTAMUR proinde and verbo nostro principali, ut debemus verissime
consirmamus, quod saepe nominatum Perpetuum Mobile Orffyreanum ita constitutum
invenerimus, ut illud neque ab externa aliqua vi aut open, minus autem ab
internis quibusdam machinis, seu horologiariae eae dicantur seu rotariae aliquo
modo dependeat; reperimus potius, quod artefactum hoc juxta innumerorum
eruditorum sensum (qua nimirum ratione reperiendum olim Mobile Perpetuum
constitutum esse debeat^) ea ipsa dudum quaesita and desiderata machina, aut
ita dictum Perpetuum Mobile pure artificiale quoad durantem materiam, etc. imo
rota talis omnino sit, quae ab interna sua propria artificiosaque vi motrice
tamdiu motum suum continuare potest, quamdiu in dicta interiore structura and
essentia nihil deficit, frangitur, laceratur aut deperditur, imo quae, si
possibile foret, nec materia ipsa defectui, mutationi, corruptioni and
similibus obnoxia foret, dubio procul motum suum sine cessatione esset
continuatura.

Ad majorem etiam veritatis confirmationem machina haec, etsi majoris operis
modulus tantum sit, ad nostram tamen non exiguam approbationem diu desideratum
mensis integri experimentum, idque duplicato temporis spatio, nobis exhibuit;
cum enim nos rotam hanc (postquam trium mensium spatio multis peregrinis et
nostratibus, summis and imis quam saepissime and frequentissime cursus sui and
motus specimen praebuisset) tandem die 12 Novembris anni proxime elapsi 1717
obserari, obseratam appresso sigillo muniri and dimidii mensis spatio
constanter moveri jussissimus; die 26 Novembris rursus eo nos contulimus, non
paucis ministris nos comitantibus, illaesa sigilla nostra cognovimus, recognita
effregimus, omnia and singula quam curatissime observavimus, and machinam motu
aeque rapido agitatam comperimus. Jam propriis nos ipsi manibus cursum machinae
stitimus, nec multo post absque notabili impulsu and inventoris auctorisque
ulla open motum machinae reddidimus, and, quo omnis aditus vel ipsi suspicioni
praecluderetur, fenestras omnes caeteraque omnia quam solicit obturari,
januas omnes, nobis, nostrisque omnibus coram inspectantibus, obserari,
cunctaque quam optime custodiri and appressis sigillis muniri jussimus.

His ita peractis and elapsis fere sex septimanis (cum nemo hoc tempore ad
dictam machinam posset accedere) nos die 4 Januarii anni hujus, propitio numine
inchoati 1718. Arcem nostram Weissensteiniam petivimus, impressa ubique sigilla
non tantum ipsi lustravimus and omnino intacta reperimus, sed apertis etiam
januis fenestrisque Mobile perpetuum Orssyreanum non interrupto motu agitatum,
ut nuper, ita hoc etiam tempore invenimus, lustratoque quam curatissime toto
conclavi ne tenuissimum actionis ullius, imo suspicionis, vestigium nobis
licuit reperire. Cumque inventor longiorem machinae suae motum offeret,
specimen magis diuturnum (praecipue cum a part adversa desideratae quatuor
septimanae duplicato temporis spatio essent adimpletae) ad purgandum omni
suspicione machinam and absolvendum a calumniis inventorem haudquaquam esse
necessarium judicavimus.

ANIMADVERSIONS, BY PROFESSOR ALLAMAN, ON THE NEGLECT OF ORFFYREUS'S INVENTION.
ON voit, que le temoignage de M.'sGravesande etoit aussi avantageux a
Orffyreus qu'il etoit possible; n'aiant pas vu l'interieur il ne pouvoit pas
juger autrement de sa machine: cependant nous allons voir que cette homme
bizarre n'en fut point content, puis qu' a cause de cet examen il mit cette
machine en pieces. Par la relation de M.'sGravesande, par celle du Baron
Fischers, and par la temoignage meme du Landgrave, il paroit demontre, que
cette Roue n'etoit point mue par aucun agent exterieur. C'est cependant ce
qu'on pretendit; on accusa Orffyreus d'etre un imposteur, qui en avoit impose a
la bonne foi du Prince, qui avoit trompe M.'sGravesande, and tout ceux qui
avoit examine sa machine. Sa propre servante deposa contre lui, and dit que
c'etoit elle qui faisoit tourner cette Roue, and insensiblement il tomba si
fort dans le mepris, que tout ceux que lui avoient protege, en avoient honte.
M. de Crousaz, qui etoit dans ce tems-la a la Cour de Cassel, ecrivit en date
du 3 Fevrier 1729 une Lettre a M.'sGravesande, ou il s'enoncoit en ces terms:
1. Orffyreus est un fou. 2. Il est incroiable qu'un fou ait decouvrit ce qu'un
infinite des habiles gens ont cherche sans aucun succes. 3. Je ne crois pas
l'incroiable. 4. On concoit aisement d'ou vient que des persons gardent pour
eux des secrets, don't ils tirent du fruit. Celui-cy ne pouvoit esperer du sien
que de la reputation, and il la laisse ternir par une accusation
circonstanciee, don't il etoit en son pouvoir de demontrer le faux, si elle
avoit ete fausse. 5. La servante se tire de chez lui de peur d'etre egorgee,
and en effet la vie d'un tell temoin est a charge. Elle a en main par ecrit le
serment terrible qu'Orffyreus lui a fait jurer. 6. Il n'avoit qu'a demander
qu'on mit cette fille en surete, and exiger un tems pour retablir sa machine.
7. On publia que cette machine alloit s'executer Je trouve dans une lettre de
Mr. Roman a Mr.'sGravesande, datee de Cassel, le 18 May 1727 que dans une mois
cette machine alloit etre retablie tell qu'elle etoit en 1721 and meme
Mr.'sGravesande y est invite par order de Landgrave, a se render a Caffel pour
assister a l'examen, qu'on en devoit fair.
; and tout d'un coup les plus avises furent ceux qui prirent le parti de s'en
taire le plus exactement. 8. Il est vrai, qu'il a chez lui une machine, a
laquelle il a done aussi le nom de mouvement perpetuel; mais il ne la
transporte pas. Elle est beaucoup plus petite and differente de la premiere,
sur-tout en ce qu'elle ne turn que d'un cote, etc.

Voila de quoi render suspect Orffyreus and sa machine. M.'sGravesande se
seroit il trompe au point que d'en avoir ete la dupe? Lisons ce qu'il a dit
lui-meme dans sa reponse a M. de Crousaz, and don't je trouve le brouillon parmi
ses papiers, mais sans date: J'ai differe de vous repondre, jusques a ce que
j'eusse recouvre un ecrit que je dressai le lendemain de l'examen de la
machine; car quoique je me souvienne tres exactement de tout ce qui s'est
pass, je crois qu'un ecrit dress le lendemain de l'examen, and communique a
Monseigneur, en presence de qui l'examen avoit ete fait, devoit etre de plus de
poids. C'est pourquoi j'ai voulu fcavoir comment je m'etois exprime.

Voici ce que j'ai appris. On dit qu'une servante assure sous serment qu'elle,
ou une autre servante, faisoit tourner la machine d'Orffyreus, etant placee
dans une chamber voisine.

Je sai bien qu' Orffyreus est un fou, j'ignore s'il est imposteur, je n'ai
jamais decide si sa machine etoit une fourberie ou non; mais ce que je sai
aussi surement qu'aucune chose au monde, c'est que si la servante dit ce que je
viens de marquer elle dit un mensonge insigne.

Mons. le Landgrave, en presence du Baron Fischer, architecte de l'empereur,
and d'autres persons, a fait demonter a ma priere les soutiens de la machine;
nous en avons vu les axes a decouvert, j'ai examine les platines dans laquells
les axes reposoient, and dans tout cette examen il n'a pas paru la moindre
trace de communication avec une chamber voisine. Je me souviens tres
distinctement de toutes les circonstances de cet examen, qui mit Orffyreus dans
une si grande colere contre moi, qu'il mit la machine en pieces, le jour meme,
and ecrivit sur la muraille, que c'etoit l'impertinente curiosite du Professeur
'sGravesande qui en etoit la cause. C'est ce que j'ai lu moi-meme l'annee
d'apres, and le resultat de l'examen est exprime clairement dans l'ecrit don't
je viens de parler.

On m'a dit plusieurs circonstances du temoignage de la servante, mais je n'y
vois pas grand difficulte: en fait de machines, je ne comte gueres sur ce que
peut dire une servante, qui peut-etre, en tournant le tourne-broche de son
maitre, aura cru fait aller le mouvement perpetuel. Si vous scavez quelque
chose de particulier touchant cette affair, vous me ferez un sensible plaisir
de me le marquer.

Il est difficile de determiner ce qu'il faut croire de cette machine. Il me
paroit cependant que si l'on examine murement tout ce qui est pour and contre
Orffyreus, on peut se fixer a ceci: 1. Orffyreus est effectivement un fou,
comme Mr.'sGravesande en convient avec Mr. de Crousaz; ses machines brisees a
deux differentes reprises, pour de fort mauvais raisons, and sans aucune
necessite, en sont de bonnes preuves. Mais c'etoit une de ces fols, tells qu'on
a voit souvent, don't la solie se borne a certains objets, and meriteroit plutot
le nomme de bizarrerie. Une tell folly est quelques fois accompagnee de
beaucoup de genie, and quand des gens de ce caractere s'appliquent a une seul
chose, comme il paroit que celui-ci a fait, il n'est pas surprenant de leur
voir fair des decouvertes qui ont echape a la sagacite de plus habiles gens.
Ainss je ne voudrois point conclure avec Mr. de Crousaz, qu'il est incroiable
qu' une fou, de l'espece de ceux parmi lefquels on doit ranger Orffyreus, ait
trouve une chose que tant de savans ont cherchee inutilement. Ajoute qu'il se
trompe quand il dit qu' Orffyreus ne pouvoit esperer de son secret que de la
reputation: il en attendoit un profit confiderable; puis qu'il en demandoit
200,000 florins. 2. Rien d'exterieur ne conservoit le mouvement de sa machine:
si c'etoit un servante qui la faisoit mouvoir, est-il apparent que cela n'eut
point ete remarque par des yeux auffi clairvoians que l'etoient ceux qui en ont
fait l'examen, ou par le Landgrave qui avoit vu l'interieur de la machine?
Dailleurs, comment peut on concevoir qu'une Roue, d'un si gros volume, eut pu
etre agitee par un cause, qui devoit agir uniquement sur l'axe en traversant
ses soutiens, and qui etoit si petite qu'elle avoit echape a l'examen le plus
rigoureux? 3. Si la servante n'a point ete gagnee pour deposer contre
Orffyreus, tout ce que son temoignage prouve, c'est que son maitre lui avoit
fait accroire, que c'etoit elle qui mettoit en mouvement la machine, en faisant
tourner un petit Rouet, and cela soit pour donner le change a ceux qui auroient
cherche a penetrer son secret, soit par une suite de son caractere singulier,
tres capable d'une imagination aussi bizarre, comme j'ai entendue dire souvent
a Mr.'sGravesande; and ce meme caractere peut fort bien encore l'avoir empeche
de refaire une nouvelle machine. 4. Il faut avouer que cette Roue etoit un
phenomene de mechanique tres remarquable: and c'est a quoi il fait s'en tenir
si l'on n'en scait que ce qu'on vient de lire; il y auroit autant de t^merite a
dire que cette invention etoit le mouvement perpetuel, qu' a ne la regarder que
comme une fourberie don't quelqu' agent exterieur etoit la cause.

REMARKS ON THE UTILITY, RECONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT OF THE BEFOREMENTIONED
MACHINE.
THE author of the preceding animadversions, though tolerably impartial in
stating the fact, seems to lean, in his conclusion, more safely than logically,
to the side of popular opinion. There is no weapon, indeed, so keen as
ridicule, no shield so impenetrable as prepossession. To withstand the
annoyance of the one, therefore, while the assailant is defended by the other,
is to sustain a conflict, in which few have the fortitude to engage and fewer
the good fortune to conquer. Yet such is the situation of him, who combats the
prejudices generally conceived against a mechanical principle of self-motion;
prejudices which have taken such deep root under the sanction of supposed
science, that all attempts to remove them have been long contemptuously
neglected as the impotent efforts of ignorance or ineptitude.

It was for this reason the author of these remarks conceived it necessary to
shelter himself under the preceding authorities, in order to obtain a more
patient hearing than his subject otherwise promised. Indeed he is not satisfied
they will have weight enough to secure him an impartial and unprejudiced
audience: it being very justly observed by a certain writer, Qu'il y a
certaines matieres si disgraciees que les plus habiles gens memes ne sauroient
les traiter avec succes.

Similar has been the fatality attending most of those discoveries, which have
proved of remarkable utility to mankind; as if the happiness of being eminently
useful to society were to be purchased only by a proportionable degree of
mortification. Hence numerous are the projects that have for ages been made the
jest of wits and derision of fools, whose solid advantages have nevertheless
been sufficiently conspicuous to the wisdom of posterity. Columbus wasted half
his life in fruitless attempts to gain credit enough to embark for the new
world; which, thanks to the ingratitude of the old, he sought at his own peril
and found to their emolument.

Orffyreus was not less ridiculed, though less rewarded, for his attempts to
explore a new world of mechanics in the discovery of a perpetual motion: a
discovery still held to be equally chimerical with that of the West Indies in
the time of Columbus. Not that the success of the Mechanic appears to have been
less than that of the Mariner: but it seems our mathematicians had not, fifty
years ago, been taught to set an egg on its little end, and Orffyreus, less
patient and more peevish than Columbus, would not let them into the Secret.

Mathematicians indeed have demonstrated the fallacy of the schemes generally
pursued by pretenders to this discovery; most of whom have been mistaken in the
fundamental principles of Statics. But the demonstrations of the
Mathematicians, however strictly just, have not been so strictly applicable to
the problem. Thus De la Hire and others affect to treat it as a reductio ad
absurdum; pretending "it is an attempt to find a body heavier or lighter than
itself." In this, however, he charges that absurdity on the problem, which
should only be imputed to an absurd mode of attempting its solution. But not to
dwell on theoretical points; it must sufficiently appear, to those who have
attentively perused the preceding pages, that Orffyreus's machine, whether it
was, what Mathematicians would call, a perpetual motion or not, was likely to
answer most of the useful purposes of that long-sought discovery. The neglect
of it therefore, though not unaccountable, was surprising; especially as the
inventor demanded only a conditional recompense. This Dr.'sGravesande himself
particularly observes in a printed tract preserved by Professor Musschenbroek.

LA question de la possibilite ou impossibilite du Mouvement perpetuel, me
paroit de fort peu de consequence, mais il seroit a souhaiter que la forte
persuasion dans laquelle sont le Mathematiciens, touchant cette impossibilite,
ne les empechat pas de fair une attention serieuse a une machine aussi
etonnante qu'est celle de Cassel. Une roue, don't le principe du mouvement est
interieur; qui se met en mouvement par le moindre effort; qu'on peut fair
tourner du cote qu'on juge a propos, sans que ce qui la fait tourner d'une cote
soit arrete par ce qui l'auroit fait tourner de l'autre, si elle y avoit ete
poussee; enfin, une roue, qui, apres avoir fait quelque millions de tours, avec
une rapidite surprenante, continue son mouvement de meme, and n'est arretee
qu'a force de bras; une tell machine merit, a ce qu'il me paroit, quelque
cloge, quand meme elle ne satisferoit pas a tout ce que l'Inventeur en promet.
Si c'est le mouvement perpetuel l'auteur merit bien la recompense qu'il
demand: si ce ne l'est point, le public peut decouvrir une belle invention,
sans que ceux qui auroient promis la recompense sussent engagez a rien;
l'Inventeur n'ayant jamais exige qu' une promise conditionelle.

Again in the same tract, he says

Il y a environ huit mois que j'examinai a Cassel, par order de S. A. S.
Monseigneur le Landgrave de Hesse, les effets d'une machine que l'Inventeur
assure etre un mouvement perpetuel. Il en cache avec soin l'interieur, jusques
a ce, dit-il, qu'on lui ait assure une recompense, qu'il ne demand de toucher,
que lorsque son invention aura ete examinee, and reconnue par les
mathematiciens pour etre ce qu'on appelle en mechanique le mouvement perpetuel.
Je sus frappe des effets de la machine; and ce que j'en vis, joint a ce que
j'en appris, d'une maniere a ne pouvoir etre revoque en doubt, me fit regarder
cette machine comme une de plus belles inventions en Mechanique don't j'aie
connaissance, a ne considerer que les effets averez.

Le desir de fair connoitre cette machine, fond sur la persuasion de
l'utilite qu'on pouroit en retirer, meme en supposant fausse la pretension de
l'Auteur, me fit ecrire a Monsieur Newton.

NOTWITHSTANDING, however, these clear and very positive declarations, of one
of the first Mathematicians of the age, corroborated by every collateral
evidence necessary to establish the credit of even the most doubtful fact; the
general prepossession of the impossibility of a perpetual motion, still
prevailed. So that Mr.'sGravesande found himself under the whimsical necessity,
of drawing up a formal demonstration of the possibility of what he had actually
seen put in practice. Of this demonstration the following is a sufficient
extract.

PREUVE de la possibilite du mouvement perpetuel, en supposant que la force du
corpse en mouvement est proportionelle a la mass multipliee par la vitesse This
principle is here proposed hypothetically; mathematicians being at that time
divided in opinion concerning the measure of mechanical forces. At present it
is universally admitted; being confirmed by innumerable experiments and the
most convincing arguments.
.

Ceux qui admettent ce principe conviennent de cette proposition; que la force
d'un corpse qui tomb librement, s'augmente en raison du tems que le corpse dans
sa chute rest expose a l'action de la pesanteur: ce qui est un suite du
principe; puisqu'il est constant par l'experience, que la vitesse d'un corpse
qui tomb, s'augmente en raison du tems de la chute.

Par la meme raison, un corpse qui monte verticalement, perd de sa force en
raison du tems qu'il monte: par consequent, si de deux corpse egaux l'un monte
verticalement, pendant que l'autre tomb librement, le premier perdra autant de
force que le second en gagne, quoiqu'ils parcourent des espaces inegaux.

La force qu'il faut pour fair monter un corpse a une certain hauteur, est
celle qu'il faut pour surmonter l'action de la pesanteur pendant que le corpse
monte; and cette force est proportionelle au tems que le corpse emploie a monter.

Si donc un corpse, en tombant librement d'une certain hauteur peut rester
expose plus long tems a l'action de la pesanteur, qu'il ne l'est en remontant a
la meme hauteur, la force qu'il acquiert en tombant surpass celle qui peut le
fair remonter. Comme il est tres possible qu'un corpse remonte plus vite qu'il
n'est descendu, c'est sur quoi je fond ma preuve de la possibilite du
mouvement perpetuel.

Concevons un corpse qui en tombant de la hauteur d'un pied perde tout son
mouvement par le choc; posons qu'il tomb quatre fois de suite de la meme
maniere: il sera descendu de la hauteur de quatre pieds, and les quatre chocs
seront egaux a la force, que la gravite communique au corpse pendant les quatre
momens de sa chute. Mais il est connu que le corpse peut remonter en deux de ces
momens a la hauteur de quatre pieds, and par consequent la force de deux de
quatre chocs suffit par pour le fair remonter and les deux autres chocs
pourront etre emploiez a fair mouvoir une machine, don't le mouvement sera
continue a perpetuite par des chutes reiterees du meme corpse, qui a chaque
revolution, gagne la force de deux chocs. Le gain de la force sera plus grande
a chaque revolution, si on augmente le nombre de chocs dans la descente. Il ne
s'agit pas ici de la maniere d'appliquer l'effort de deux chocs qu'il faut pour
fair remonter le corpse: je ne dis pas que j'ai trouve le mouvement perpetuel;
il suffit de demontrer, comme je viens de le fair, qu'il y a dans la nature un
principe d'augmentation de force, pour soutenir que la mouvement perpetuel
n'est pas contradictoire, and meme qu'il est possible.

Cette possibilite paroitra plus clairement si on fait attention a cette
propriete des ressorts, qu'ils se debandent avec la meme force qu'ils ont ete
bandez, sur quelque corpse qu'ils agissent. Soient deux corpse que je nomme A.
and B. Je suppose que A pese quatre livres, and B une livre. B en descendant de
la hauteur de quatre pieds peut fair monter A a la hauteur d'un pied, par le
moien d'un levier ou de quelque autre machine; ce qui n'est pas contest. Je
nomme un la vitesse qu'un corpse acquiert en tombant de la hauteur d'un pied a
laquelle il vient d'etre eleve: il aura quatre degrez de force. Supposons
encore que A par son choc band un ressort, and qu'il y employe toute la force
de son choc. Si ce ressort en se debandant agit sur B, il communiquera a B
quatre degrez de force: c'est a dire, puisque la mass de B est un, quatre
degrez de vitesse, qui feront remonter le corpse B a une hauteur de seize pieds,
quadruple de la hauteur don't il etoit descendu d'abord.

THE celebrated John Bernouilli, speaking of the above demonstration, in a
letter to the author, remarks that it is very just; the principle assumed
necessarily involving an augmentation The great mathematician maintains the
possibility of a perpetual motion, also in his other writings. See J.
Bernouilli opera, Tom. I. page 42.
of force, viz. A perpetual motion. But this, continues he, is no more than
Leibnitz had long before demonstrated in his dispute with Papin and others.

The author of these remarks had indeed, long before he saw the above letters
and arguments, conceived a notion of the possibility of saving the force, which
descending bodies acquire by gravity; and of applying it to a circular motion.
But, immersed in business, or engaged in different studies, he should perhaps
have acquiesced till now in the general opinion of its impracticability; had
not an accidental conversation, many years ago, on the spot where Orffyreus
exhibited his machine, awakened his curiosity and directed his attention to an
object which he has ever since occasionally pursued. The experiments he has
made, even so long since as the year 1761, convinced him so far of the reality
of Orffyreus's discovery, that he applied for letters patent to secure an
exclusive right to the construction of a similar machine; which he had
contrived and denominated A ROTATOR. Before his patent, however, was expedited,
he reflected that, although the model he had constructed might serve to remove
the prejudices of the public, it was not so well calculated as it might be, to
answer the practical purposes of so important a discovery. To the improvement
of the Rotator, therefore, has he long since dedicated all the time and
attention he could possibly spare from his other, more immediately necessary,
pursuits.

Not that he believes he has contrived quite so many different machines as
Orffyreus did, though he has been almost as many years engaged in the like
undertaking; he has nevertheless both contrived and constructed a considerable
number; many of them useless as costly, except indeed as they served to assist
him in completing his invention.

The point in question now is, in what manner he should publish his discovery
to the greatest advantage of the public and himself.

It were an easy matter, if the solution of a theoretical problem only were in
view, to convince even the most incredulous and obstinate mathematician, by a
mechanical and ocular demonstration. But, as a discovery of this nature would
be of the utmost consequence and advantage to the commercial world, the
inventor would be imprudently wanting to himself and family did he not
previously enter into some pecuniary stipulation adequate to its importance
with the public, and his own study, application and expense in bringing it to
perfection.

Such a previous stipulation is the more requisite, as the extreme simplicity
of the invention, when discovered, may not tend to heighten the public opinion
of its difficulty, though now it be so generally thought impossible.

By Letters Patent, it is true, the inventor might secure to himself
an-exclusive right, among his countrymen, to the construction of his present
machine, for a term of years. But in that case, its utility, which might
otherwise soon become universal, would be confined to the small circle of his
particular attention. Add to this that, as he proposes to furnish a general
first mover for all such machines, as are usually worked by fire, water, wind,
or cattle, it is impossible he should have provided all the particular
apparatus adapted to the vast variety of mills and other engines, to which it
may be differently applied. It is to be observed also, that in the mean time,
Foreigners would reap an advantage, from which he could deduce none; and the
manufactories abroad enjoy a benefit, denied to those at home.

With all deference and submission, therefore, to the public he proposes to
adopt the method prescribed by the prince of Hesse Cassel, in favor of
Orffyreus.

That the inventor shall dispose of his discovery, on certain terms, to as many
voluntary subscribers as choose to become proprietors; each in proportion to
their quota of the sum to be subscribed. -- The said company of subscribers to
become possessed of the inventor's right and pretensions to any exclusive
privilege or emolument he might, or may obtain, by letters patent, or public
premium, either at home or abroad.

The inventor flatters himself that, if the contents of the foregoing pages are
seriously attended to, and it be farther considered that not a penny of the
proposed premium is required, till the subscribers are fully satisfied of the
reality and utility of the invention, his proposal will not be treated with so
mortifying a neglect as was that of Orffyreus.

As to the quantum of the required premium, the inventor proposes to consult
the first twenty subscribers to the undertaking; with whom he would settle the
terms and mode of ascertaining the merit of the discovery.

With respect, indeed, to the criterion, by which the payment of the premium is
to be determined; the inventor does not mean to have it depend on the
acceptance of equivocal terms. He does not insist that the Rotator is what
every mathematician would call a perpetual motion; being perfectly of
'sGravesand's opinion that it is of little consequence in mechanics, whether
the perpetual motion, strictly so called, be possible or not: but if his
machine be found to answer all the practical purposes to be expected from that
discovery; so as to save the expense, and obviate the inconveniences, attending
the present methods of working mills, pumps and other mechanical engines, he
will expect his reward. On the contrary, if it does not supply the place of a
first mover, at the expense only of the construction and repair of a simple
wheel, subject to very little friction; and that in all such engines and
machines even from the slightest piece of clock-work to the water works of
Marli or London Bridge, he expects nothing for his discovery, but to stand
exposed to the contempt, that will be justly thrown on him for having so
miserably misspent his time, and frivolously engaged the attention of the public.

It may be expected, the inventor should make a public exhibition, in imitation
of Orffyreus, of a similar Machine. He might indeed construct an useless model
in that form: but as the utility of his design has ever been the great object
in view, he has been little sollicitous about such a mode of construction:
being the less inclined to such an exhibition from the mortifying example of
it is little use, or rather it is great prejudice to Orffyreus. Another reason is
that to persons, capable of judging of mechanical inventions, such a machine
would carry no conviction with it of the certainty of the author's pretensions.
And with regard to others it would only serve to excite, without gratifying, an
idle and fruitless curiosity.

Such bodies corporate, private companies or individuals, as are interested in
the construction or use of considerable mechanical engines, or are disposed to
encourage the present discovery, may receive any farther information they
require, on applying to the inventor,

WILLIAM KENRICK,
Charles-Street, St. James's Square, March 1. 1770.

