A DESCRIPTION OF THE ROAD FROM LONDON TO BATH AND BRISTOL; WITH EVERY THING
WORTH NOTICE IN THE WAY.

BY THE REV. DR. TRUSLER.

London: SOLD BY SHEPPERSON AND CO. NO. 137, OXFORD-STREET, BYFIELD AND CO.
STATIONERS, CRAIG'S COURT, CHARING CROSS, AND FAULDER, BOOKSELLER, BOND-STREET;
AND THE BOOKSELLERS OF BATH AND BRISTOL, WHERE MAY BE HAD ALL DR. TRUSLER'S
BOOKS.

1797.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE ROAD FROM LONDON TO BATH AND BRISTOL.
THE Bath road is measured from Hyde Park corner. On the right as we leave
London, is Hyde Park, a park belonging to the crown; it is much frequented by
those who wish to take the air, either on foot, on horseback, or in carriages.
In fine weather, it is generally crowded from two o'clock in the afternoon till
five.

The first village that occurs, as soon as we are through the turnpike-gate, is
Knightsbridge. On entering this place, opposite the Park wall, stands St.
George's Hospital, an endowment for sick and lame. A little beyond this, the
road falls off on the left to Chelsea and Fulham-bridge.

About half a mile from the gate, on the right, going out of Knightsbridge, is
a new building, standing within the Park wall, built as barracks for the
soldiery.

About two miles from town, is the village of Kensington; on the right as you
enter it, is one of the King's palaces; the gardens to which are laid out in
lawn and shrubbery, and kept in good order, and are open certain hours of the
day for people to walk in.

This spot was formerly the seat of the Veres, ancestors of the Earls of
Oxford, to whom it was given by William the Conqueror: it afterward fell into
the possession of Lord Chancellor Finch, Earl of Nottingham; and was from him
purchased by William III. who built the palace. It has been the temporary
residence of successive Kings and Queens of England, from William III. to
George II. who died there.



The next house on the right, whose grounds adjoin Camden House; and near the
turnpike, is a stately Gothic structure, on the summit of a spacious lawn,
called Holland House; belonging to the Earl of Holland, and built by an
ancestor, in the reign of Elizabeth.





On the right, at about half a mile distant, but in view, is a house, called
Gunnersbury House, built by Mr. Webb, son-in-law to Inigo Jones; it was the
property and residence of the late Princess Amelia, aunt to the present King.

A little beyond this, on the left, stands Kewbridge, crossing the Thames, and
leading to Kew, Richmond, etc. in the county of Surrey. The road from London
here, as far Colnbrooke, is in the county of Middlesex.

We now enter the old town of Brentford, which, with the new town in
continuance, is more than a mile in length. This town is poor, dirty, and
straggling; it stands on the banks of the Thames; on the opposite shore of
which, are the beautiful and royal gardens of Kew and Richmond, The seven mile
stone stands at the corner of a street,

Brentford is a market town, and the county town, where the members for the
county are chosen, on a building erected for the purpose, behind the market
house. Despicable as this town appears, it carries on a good trade with the
metropolis, by means of the river, in corn, malt, and other commodities.

In 1612, Charles I. beat his enemies at this place; and the Earl of Forth,
commander of the Kings forces, was created Earl of Brentford, which title
became extinct at his death, in 1651.

Passing the bridge, as we leave the town on the right, is the navigable canal
from Uxbridge, etc. that enters the Thames hard by.

A little beyond Brentford on the left, is the colonnade or gates entering the
seat of the Duke of Northumberland, called Sion House, from a monastery founded
here, in 1414, by Henry V. Edward VI. gave it to his uncle, the Protector, in
1547, who began to build this magnificent structure, the walls of which now
remain. After the attainder and execution of this nobleman, it was confiscated,
and afterward given to the Duke of Northumberland, and on his execution, in
1553, it reverted to the Crown: James II. gave it to the Earl of Northumberland
and his heirs for ever. The house is a quadrangle, of white stone, seated on
the banks of the Thames.

Scarce do we pass this place, but we reach the grounds of an elegant villa, on
the right, called Sion Hill, belonging to the Duke of Marlborough.

The road on the left, through a turnpike-gate, leads to Isleworth, Twickenham,
and Hampton Court, distance about four or five miles.

Passing the eight mile stone we come to Smallborough

From Smallborough Green we enter Hounslow;

Just beyond the 10 mile stone, on the left, are

Twelve miles and a half from London, a rivulet,

The road beyond Cranford-bridge, is still a level; it, Dawley; formerly in the
possession of the Lords Bolingbroke and Tankerville, now the property of Edmond
Stephenson, Esquire.

Arlington or Harlington, with Dawley, formerly the seat of the Bennets, or
Tankerville family, gave them the title of Baron, in 1663, which title belongs
now to the Duke of Grafton, descended by the female line, from the only
daughter of John Bennet, Baron Arlington.





We now pass the pretty village of Longford, and the road becomes more pleasant.



Just before we reach Colnbrooke, we pass the road on the left, leading to
Stains, a merket town, about six miles distant on the Exeter road.





About two miles on the left, is the village of

After passing Colnbrook, in our way to Slough, the country on the left is more
liverly, and Windsor Castle is frequently in view; also the town and college of
Eton, in the valley below it.

Upton about a mile on the left.

Slough is a large village in the road, about a mile and a half from Windsor.
It consists of one street, and contains some good inns. Near this, on the left
of the Windsor road, leading from this place, lives the celebrated Doctor
Herschell. The apparatus which gives motion to his grand telescope, is seen
from the high road; his establishment is at the expense of the King.

Windsor Castle has been a royal residence, with some interruptions, from the
conquest to the present time. William I. was the first who built a palace here;
Henry I. fortified it, and Edward III. enlarged it. Eton College was founded by
Henry VI. the chapel is a stately Gothic structure, and may be seen from the
road.



Salt Hill has little more to be noticed than one or two good inns. To this
place the Eton scholars parade once in two years, to distribute salt, and
collect money of travelers, according to an ancient custom.



this, in view of the Bath road, is a house of Lady Ravensworth.

A house on the left belonging to Mr. Airs.

Hitcham on the right.

As we approach Maidenhead-bridge the country

On the summit of the hill, between the village of Taploe and the Thames, is
the seat of the Earl of Inchiquin, called Cliefden House. It was built by
Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, in Charles Is It reign, purchased by the first
Earl of Orkney, and, by marriage, is now in possession of the Earl of
Inchiquin. Frederic Prince of Wales, father of the present King, resided here
in the summer.

Adjoining Cliefden is Hedsor Lodge, the seat of Lord Boston, standing on an
eminence; below which, in the valley, is the seat of Sir George Young, a house
lately built.

At Maidenhead-bridge, we enter Berkshire, from right, and Windsor Castle and
the forests on the left, present picturesque landscapes.

Maidenhead is a town of some consequence, its borough was founded by Edward
III. and incorporated by James II. The town stands in the parish of Bray, to
the left; and that of Cookham, to the right.

Adjoining Maidenhead, on the south, is the seat of P. Pouney, Esquire. an old
house, with a new park.

From Maidenhead, a hollow way leads to the summit of a hill; from whence to
the north, the three villas of Cliefden, Taploe, and Hedsor Lodge, appear
embosomed in wood.





Here a road branches to the west, leading to Hall Place, the seat of Sir
William Este, Baronet, about a mile distant. It has a beautiful park, but
small. The eye ranging over the race-ground, toward the east, may discover the
seats of John Grant, Esquire. and Mr. Sayer.

From a rising ground, on the further side of the

Near Shottesbrook is a stately mansion, in a pleasant

Beyond this stone is the house of Mrs. Phillips,

Hare Hatch is just beyond the 32 mile stone, a

From Twyford there is a road a mile and a half to Wargrave, a pleasant town,
situated on the banks of the Thames, where the late Earl of Barrymore resided,
and had an elegant theater for his own amusement. Twyford was formerly a market
town. Queen Emma gave it to the Bishop of Winchester; it was annexed to this
see, till Bishop Poynet gave it to Edward VI. who granted it to Henry Neville.
Queen Mary took it from him, and gave it to Bishop White, Poynet's successor;
but Queen Elizabeth restored it to Neville, and with his posterity it has
continued.

Twyford is a small town, about five miles east of Reading, situated near the
conflux of the Thames and the Loddon.







Caversham Park two miles north of Reading,

About two miles on his side Reading, a road, on the left, leads to White
Knights, lately the seat of Sir Henry Inglefield, now Mr. Neville's. It is a
stately building, in a pleasant park. This place was one of the first examples
of the Ferme Ornee.

On the left, a little beyond this, one mile from Reading, is Early Court, the
residence of J. Bagnal, Esquire..

A new road through Crambourne Chase, Windsor forest, 18 miles in length, has
not long since been made, by permission, through the pleasant villages of
Wingfield, Warfield, and Binfield, and from the number of elegant seats on this
road, and the beautiful scenery about it, it is one of the most delightful
roads in the kingdom.

Reading, 39 miles from London, is seated on an easy declivity, on the
south-shore of the Thames. The streets are spacious, and well-paved, and
contain some good houses. The river Kennet runs through the town in two
separate streams, and falls into the Thames, a mile below it; barges come up to
the town by the river. It is the county town, is governed by a Mayor, 12
Aldermen, and 12 Burgesses, and sends two members to Parliament. It has three
parish churches, and is said to have been a borough soon after the Conquest. It
was anciently in possession of the Danes, who surrendered it to the Saxons in
827.

A magnificent abbey was founded here by Henry I. about 1124: Henry I. and his
Queen were buried here. The abbey is destroyed, but the Gatehouse is still
standing, and a venerable ruin it is. Here are two or three stage coaches that
pass and repass daily between this town and London, and one that goes the
forest road. There is also a coach that goes three times a week from this to
Oxford, 40 miles, and returns the alternate days.

Reading stood a siege in the civil-war, and made a gallant defense in favor
of the King. It had once a woollen manufactory, but its trade consists now
chiefly of malt, meal, corn, timber, and sailcloth. Manufactories of silk and
lawn have lately been here established, and meet with encouragement. Very
little of the town is seen in traveling to Bath, the road passing only through
one end of it.

In the Philosophical Transactions we are told, that a stratum, or bed of
oyster-shells, of 5 or 6 acres in extent, was discovered on Catsgrove Hill,
near this town, a circumstance worthy the attention of the natural historian.

A little beyond the 40 mile stone, on the left, is

From a rising ground at the west end of Reading,

About a mile on the right, as we leave Theal, is viz. Sir Henry Englefield. It
was built by one of the Paulets, Marquis of Winchester; but reduced and
modernized by its late owner, Paulet

In the meadows, north of the Kennet, is a square entrenchment, said to have
been thrown up when Earl Ethelwolf routed the Danes here, in 871.









Aldermason on the left; near which is the seat of the representative of the
third Lord Stawell.

Three miles east of this place, once stood Silchester, a Roman city of great
note, called Vindomium, which covered 80 acres of ground. It was built by
Constantine, in 337: there are now no vestiges left but the walls and gates of
the town, which may be considered as the most perfect remains of Roman
greatness in this island. On the north-east side are the traces of an
amphitheatre, now converted into a straw-yard. Many Roman ways centered near
this place, which stands in the county of Hants.

As we leave Woolhampton, the road rises to the seat of Mrs. Crewe, standing on
a rising ground, about half a mile on the right.

Midgham on the right; near which is a house

Beyond Woolhampton, a large tract of beautiful

Coldthorp on the left.

Thatcham, a small, neat town, of one street, Sir

On the left, on the south side of the valley, the the seat of Mr. Mount stands
conspicuously.

From Thatcham the road runs along, up and down hill, till within a mile of
Newbury; here it is more level and enclosed, and the country on both right and
left, consists of woody hills, interspersed with farm-houses; the river Kennet
on the left.

Near Newbury on the right, is Shaw, the seat of

Newbury is a large populous town, 56 miles distant from London, situated in a
plain, watered by the Kennet. It rose out of the ruins of Speen, an old town,
called Spine, or Speen; the remains of which now join Newbury. Hence the new
town was called New Borough, or Newbury. Part of this place is called Spinham
Land.

The streets are spacious, and well paved; and the market-house is a handsome
building: like Reading, this cannot be seen as we pass it, for the road touches
it only at one end. It is a vicarage, in the gift of the Crown; and governed by
a Mayor, High Steward, and 8 Burgesses; but sends no members to Parliament.
There are stage coaches from this place to London, etc.

Newbury was once an ancient clothing town, but this business is now lost, in
some measure, by the Kennet having been made navigable here, and carrying on a
trade more to the eastward. Here lived the famous Jack of Newbury, the greatest
clothier that ever existed, having employed 100 looms, in his own house, in the
reign of Henry VIII. He marched to the battle of Flodden Field, at the head of
100 of his own men, clothed and maintained by himself.

Newbury is remarkable for two battles in the Civil War, between the King and
his Parliament, his Majesty commanding both in person: the first was fought at
the barrows, on the wash, two miles south-east of the town. In this battle,
Sept. 18, 1643, fell, of the King's party, the Earls of Sunderland and
Carnarvon, and Lord Viscount Falkland. The second battle was fought the year
following, Sunday morning, October 27, 1644, by daybreak, at Shaw.

Lord Portchester has an elegant and noble seat at High Clear Park, in
Hampshire, five miles south from Newbury. The house stands by the side of a
very high hill, a distinguished object, and conspicuous landmark.

From Newbury we proceed to Speenham Land,

Opposite Speen, in a valley on the right, is Donnington Grove, the seat of Wm.
Brummell, Esquire. It is a handsome building, partly Gothic, though lately built by
J. Petit Andrews; by whom it was sold to Mr. Brummel, and may be seen from the
road. On the hill to the north of it, are the venerable, ruined towers of
Donnington Castle, rearing its head above a wood of oaks. The Castle was a post
of great consequence in the Civil War, and stood a siege of three weeks against
the rebel army. This Castle was also the residence of the poet Sir Geoffery
Chaucer. Alice, daughter of Sir Thomas Chaucer, son to the Poet, married
William de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk. On his attainder it came to the Crown; and
was afterward, by grant of Henry VII. given to Charles Brandon, Duke of
Suffolk. Under James I. it belonged to the Packers, whose heiress married Dr.
Hartley, ancestor to Mr. Hartley, its present possessor.













Sixty-four miles and half from London we approach Hungerford, by a small
bridge over the river Kennet. It is a market town, consisting of two parallel
streets. In the church lies interred Robert de Hungerford, the first of that
family in this county; whose nephew, Sir Thomas, was the first member of the
House of Commons, 51st of Edward III.

The Constable, who is Lord of the Manor, is annually chosen, and holds it of
the Crown; they show a horn here, holding about 2 quarts, which, by an
inscription on it, appears to have been given by John of Gaunt; who procured a
grant for the royal fishery in the Kennet, remarkable for its trout, its eels,
and its cray-fish.

A little beyond Hungerford we enter Wiltshire.

A road on the right leads through a noble avenue,

Littlecot Park is in the vicarage of Ramsbury, where they pride themselves in
fine strong-beer. It is now a small village, but was once the sea of the
Bishops, whose diocese was this county; but by the union of this see with
Sherborne, by Herman, the eighth Bishop, it was removed to Salisbury.







Tottenham Park and the Forest, is the property and seat of the Earl of
Aylesbury. It belonged, formerly, to the Seymour family; but fell to Lord
Bruce, by the marriage of Elizabeth Seymour, granddaughter of William, Duke of
Somerset, with the Earl of Aylesbury, his grand-uncle. The forest with the
park, is 12 miles round; and abundantly stocked with deer.

At his distance from the capital, stands the town

Marlborough was a Roman station; and the site of the old Castrum was, by the
Earl of Hertford, converted into a house, and now into an elegant inn, at the
west end of the town: the Keep is used as a mount, for a summer house. The town
consists chiefly of one broad street. The shops, on both sides, are supported
in front by pillars, forming piazzas. It has two parish churches; and is
governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, and 24 Burgesses; but has no trade. It
originally gave title to James Ley, Lord High Treasurer, under Charles I. but
becoming extinct in that family, King William, in 1689, made Lord John
Churchill, Earl of Marlborough; and Queen Anne afterward, created him Marquis
of Blandford, and Duke of Marlborough.

Proceeding from Marlborough, and descending the gray wethers; they are a
species of granite; and lie on the surface of the ground in great numbers, and
of all dimensions. They are loose, detached from any rock, and, as Dr. Stukeley
thinks, have lain there ever since the creation; being solid parts thrown out
to the surface of the fluid globe, when its rotation was first impressed.









Proceeding on to the 81 mile-stone, we pass a small hill, or high tumulus, a
barrow higher than general, called Silbury Hill, the largest of this kind in
England. It is of a conical form, 170 feet high, 105 feet diameter at the top,
and more than 500 feet at its base; having a trench round it, from which this
tumulus was thrown up. This hill has been dug into, and a human skeleton was
found, bedded in chalk, which crumbled to pieces on touching; near it lay an
old horse-bit, deer's horns, and an iron knife, with a bone handle.

At Abury, about a mile from this hill, on the right of the road, is the
remains of a magnificent Druidical temple. A village has been built within its
circle, and out of its stones; the gardens and orchards, etc. have rather
disfigured and concealed the great original design.

The whole is surrounded with an immense circular rampart, or terrace, 60 feet
broad; and a ditch within of the same breadth; the diameter is 1400 feet; the
circumference 4,800 feet; and the area enclosed 22 acres; through the center of
which runs the high road from Marlborough to Bath.

The first circle of stones within this area, is 13,000 feet diameter, and
consists of 100 stones from 15 to 17 feet square; reduced, in 1722, to 40; of
which, only 17 were standing, and about 43 feet asunder. There were other
circles of stones, like those of Stonehenge, at present there are only a few
stones standing.

Passing the 81 mile-stone we reach Beckhampton,

Sandy Lane Road, which is the way to Chippenham, was the old Bath road, and
turned off at Shepherd's Shore, beyond the 84 mile stone; but a new road is now
made through Calne to Chippenham, and this turns off at Beckhampton. There is
an inn in the angle.

Those who wish to see Bowood, the noble seat of the Marquis of Landsdown, and
Spy Park, the seat of Sir Edward Bayntun, should travel this road.



White Horse Hill takes its name from the figure of a horse hollowed out in the
chalk, on that side next the road. It is so large as to be seen at a great
distance; and was cut in memory of the victory, obtained by Alfred, over the
Danes, near Eddington, in the year 878. The figure is 54 feet from the toe to
the chest, 100 feet from the toe to the point of the ear, and 100 feet from ear
to tail. This battle was fought near the village of Eddington, where the Danish
army was encamped.



From the village of Cherhill, we pass over Cummerford the left, stands
Blacklands, the seat of Mr. Maundrell; and, before we reach the 87 mile-stone,
we cross a stream at the village of Cummerford, on which there are several
cloth and corn mills.

Another half mile brings us to Calne, a small

At the entrance of Calne, (by order of the Marquis of Lansdown,) the old
houses have been pulled down, and small neat houses, for the poor, erected in
their stead. It is a town of great antiquity, and has sent members to
parliament since the 26th of Edward I.

Here stood a palace of the Saxon Kings; and, in the controversy between the
Monks and the Priests, respecting the celibacy of the clergy, a grand council
was held here, in 977; and, during the debate, the floor of the chamber gave
way, and many were killed; Dunstan, who presided, and who favored the Monks,
escaped unhurt, which they conceived as a miracle that confirmed the Monkish
Law.

Calne is a market town, and contains near 3000 inhabitants, and considerable
manufactories of cloth, serges, etc.

About a quarter of a mile from Calne, on the right, is seen the principal
entrance to Bowood, from the London side. Bowood Park was once a royal one, and
part of the jointure of Catherine Parr, widow of Henry VIII. James I. if said
to have hunted here; at which time all the country, on the left of the road,
from Calne to Chippenham, was a continued forest; afterward divided, by grant,
between the ancestors of Lord Audley and Mr. Carey, an ancient Roman Catholic
family, in Devonshire; which last has lately been purchased by Mr. Montague, of
Lackham; about 4 miles distant.

Bowood was disparked in the time of Oliver Cromwell, and granted, for ever, to
Sir Orlando Bridgman, a favorite of Charles II. Sir Orlando dying insolvent,
the late Earl of Shelburne bought it of his creditors. To a house of 80 feet in
front, the late Lord added offices of 300 feet in front, and fronted and
enclosed these offices with a colonnade, taken from a part of Dioclesians
palace, at Spalatro, in Dalmatia; the seats in the garden were chiefly taken
from the Herculaneum. Within the park is a fine menagerie of wild beasts.





Red Hill on the left; the white gate leads to

About a quarter of a mile further, we pass Studley, on the right, which was
the seat of a Roman Colony, now occupied by some very poor cottages.

One mile from this place stands Spy Park, the seat of Sir Edward Bayntun;
separated from the enclosures of Bowood by the old Bath road, through Sandy
Lane, 90 miles from London. Adjoining Spy Park is Rowden House, the seat of E.
Dickenson, Esquire.

Continuing the Bath road, between Pin hills and Bromhill, we descend into a
valley.

Passing the 90 mile stone, we leave the entrance to Bowood from Bath, on the
left; and, descending Derry Hill, we proceed to Chippenham.

The Swan Inn.

On the left Pewsham Forest; and a little to the

Chippenham, situated on the river Avon, is a in 879. It is governed by a
Bailiff, and 12 Burgesses, chartered by Queen Mary. The town is divided by the
Avon, over which is a low bridge, of 16 arches. Here are some few manufactories
of woolen cloth.

Leaving Chippenham, we travel through a pleasant country; but, before we reach
the 95 milestone, we ascend a hill, and the road winds along its northern side;
beyond this we rise again, and reach Corsham.





Minety on the right, where a road crosses the Bath road.



Corsham is a small near town, standing on a flat. Ethelred, the Saxon King,
had a palace here; and it was the seat of several of the Earls of Cornwall.
Earl Edmund obtained a charter for a market; and Mr. Methuen, Lord of the
Manor, has built a neat market-house, and tried to restore it.

Brickers and Pickwick on the left; Hartham

A little before we reach the 97 mile-stone, the turnpike divides; the right
hand road runs through Upper Pickwick; the left hand, through Lower Pickwick,
and joins again at the 99 mile stone.

A little beyond this stone, on the right, is Vaccaris,

On the hill, on the right, Coldham Church and

From the 99th mile stone, the road winds along the ridge of a hill, and
presently dips toward Box. Descending this hill, we command prospects over a
rich valley, through which a rivulet streams; the high ground, on the lest,
contains many quarries of freestone, such as Bath is built with.

Box is a neat village, at the foot of the hill, six miles from Bath.

Beyond Box, a steep descent brings us lower into





As we approach Bath, delightful prospects meet the eye; to the west, the city;
on the left, the High Ground, less secured with wood on the east, a rich
valley, with a lofty ridge, protecting it from the north.





Before we proceed further, we will turn back, and describe the road to Bath
through Devizes, from Beckhampton, where it branched off on Marlborough Downs
to Calne; a little beyond the 81 mile stone.



A little beyond the 84 mile-stone, at a place called Shepherd's Shard, or
Shore, the Devizes road turns off on the left.

At Shepherd's Shore we cross Wansdike, which is another stupendous monument of
antiquity, a fosse made in the time of the Romans, as one of the boundaries of
the Belgic Kingdom. It passes 2 miles south of Marlborough, on the northern
verge of the great ridge of hills, dividing, north and south, Wiltshire, till
it descends St. Anne's Hill, on the left of Shepherd's Shore, making several
right angles along the edges of the other hills, then mounts to the summit of
Roundway Hill; on the north side the Roman road from Marlborough, unites with
the Wansdike. Hence the Dike passes through Spy Park to the shire stones, at
the division between Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, and Somersetshire.

The Down continues.

Bishop Cannings on the left; Bagdon Hill on

Roundway Hill is famous for a battle fought here, July 13, 1648, between the
King's army, and that of the Parliament, under Sir Wm. Waller. Sir William
summoned it to surrender on certain conditions, which the besieged took
advantage of, when the King's army was victorious, killed 600, and took 900
prisoners.





The town has two churches; was chartered by Charles I. sends two members to
Parliament, and is governed by a Mayor, Recorder, eleven Aldermen, and 36
Common Council: its manufactories are kerseymere, druggets, and other woollen
cloths.

About half a mile from the town, is New Park, the seat of James Sutton, Esquire.
at the foot of Roundway Down, an elegant stone mansion, built by James Wyatt.





Near the village of Seend, 3 miles south of the Bath road, is Stoke Park, the
seat of the late Peter Delme, Esquire. now of Joshua Smith, Esquire. member for
Devizes. Mr. Smith has pulled the old house down, and built a new one, on a
more elevated situation, and of Grecian architecture: its structure, from east
to west, is 355 feet in front; it is just finished, and unites convenience and
elegance.

Red Stacks on the right.

Bowyer on the left.

Bowyer House on the right. Bowyer Island on

Bowyer Hill

Turnpike.

Melksham, a small neat town, on the banks of

Just beyond this stone, on the left, is Shaw House,

Shaw Hill; hence the road passes over Atford

Wormwood.

Near this stone, a road crosses the turnpike; that

Cutts Corner.

Here we begin to ascend Kingsdown Hill, from east, we look over great part of
Wilts, with Round-way Hill; on the west, over Somersetshire; on the north-west,
Gloucestershire.





Bath is a very ancient city of Somersetshire; its hot springs are said to have
been discovered 863 years before Christ, by Bladud, from Brute. It is allowed
to have been, formerly, a very extensive city, and to have been first reduced
by the Romans, about the year 81.

Bath is seated in a very fertile vale, on the banks of the river Avon, and
surrounded by hills, so as to be a very close, warm place, particularly in
summer. From the bowels of these hills, is dug that beautiful freestone made
use in building the city. Its increase, within the last 60 years, has been
great and quick; from a small contracted town, it has extended itself into open
streets and squares, with other elegant buildings in various forms; the whole
making a city of considerable magnitude, so as to ascend almost to the summit
of the hills about it, and new works are still going on.

The heat of the waters in the different baths, are as follow, according to
Farenheit's Thermometer: The water in the King's bath, raises the mercury in
its coldest place to 100 degrees; in its hottest, to 103 degrees. The hot bath
exceeds this by some degrees; the degrees of heat in the Cross bath, is 94; and
in the Queen's bath, 99.

Ladies and Gentlemen assemble every morning from 7 till 10, to drink the
waters.

The amusements are various, rational, and well-conducted. There are two sets
of assembly rooms, where the amusements are alternately held, and a theater.
Here are two hospitals, and four churches, including the abbey church. The
abbey was founded by Osric, in 676; but the present building was begun in 1495,
but not completed, as it now is, till 1666. It has seven doors, and 52
windows, answering to the weeks in a year, and the days in a week: the tower is
162 feet high, and has a peel of 10 bells. Here are 12 other places of worship,
and a public grammar school, endowed by Edward VI.

Bath is governed by a Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and 20 Common Council; sends
two members to Parliament, and is the sea of a Bishop, in conjunction with
Wells. Here is a court of Record, that takes cognizance of debts above 40 s,
and a Court of Conscience, that determines matters under that sum.

It has two markets weekly, Wednesdays and Fridays; and well supplied,
particularly with fish.

Bath being surrounded with very high hills, which are unpleasant to climb,
very few people like to keep carriages. It is a remarkably clean place, and,
lying on such a declivity, it is soon washed clean by a shower of rain, and is
soon dry enough to walk upon, without soiling the shoes; and, for the
accommodation of going to the rooms dressed, sedan-chairs are always at hand,
for 6 d. or 1 s.

The country round the city, is embellished with gentlemen's seats; the most
distinguished is Prior Park, the seat of the late Ralph Allen.

Lansdown over-hangs the city, and is renowned for a battle in the Civil Wars,
on July 5, 1643, when the King's forces beat those of the Parliament. A
monument is erected on it, in commendation of the abovementioned victory, by
George Lord Lansdown, in 1720.

The river Avon has been made navigable from Bath to Bristol, and makes the
intercourse between them great. There are two roads to Bristol; the distance,
13 miles: one called the Upper Road; and the other, the Lower. The Upper runs
from the west end of the city, along the northern side of the river, and
through a part of Gloucestershire; the Lower, and the most frequented, winds
along the southern bank of the river, from the old bridge; and a communication
between these two roads, is formed by a handsome stone bridge, of one arch,
over the same river, about two miles and a half below the town.

Passing then over the bridge, the Lower Road,

The Vale of Bath, through which the Avon runs, is beautiful in all its parts,
and worth the travellers' notice.

Proceeding on from Newton, we leave the village

Before we reach Keynsham, we see a handsome house on the north; this belongs
to Edward Line, Esquire.

Keynsham is a small market town, standing on two hills, on the south bank of
the Avon, with a small bridge over the river Chew, which runs by it. The
counties of Gloucester and Somerset are joined by a larger bridge over the Avon,
below the town.

Keynsham Church is of Gothic structure, and the high grounds beyond the town,
have a beautiful effect.

Passing Keynsham, the house on the right is Mr. Butcher's.

At Stanton Drew, a few miles from Keynsham, are the remains of a Druid Temple,
known by the name of the Wedding, from a vulgar opinion, that a bride and her
attendants were changed into these stones. This temple, says Mr. Wood,
consisted of three circles of stones, and formed a model of the Pythagorean
System of the planetary world.

From Keynsham we descend into an enclosed wood-land country, leaving Keynsham
Park on the

Between the nine and ten mile-stones, the house on the right is Mr. Weirs;
that on the left Mr. Ireland's.

From the abovementioned hill, we descend to



Beyond Brislington we go down an avenue of verdure, on the left; and a more
cultivated country on the right: and again passing many handsome

A little beyond the 12 mile-stone, on the left, is the high road to Wells.

Bristol is 120 miles from London through Bath, but 6 miles nearer through
Chippenham and Marshfield: it stands part in Somersetshire, and part in
Gloucestershire, the two counties being divided by the river Avon.

This city is a county within itself, made so by Edward III. and Henry VIII.
made it a bishop's see. It has 3 handsome squares, and 18 churches, besides the
cathedral, which stands in Gloucestershire. The church of St. Mary Redcliff, is
worthy attention, being the most beautiful structure of the kind in the
kingdom: its roof is a solid arch of freestone.

Bristol sends two members to Parliament; and is governed by a Mayor, Recorder,
12 Aldermen, two Sheriffs, and 42 Common Council.

About a mile west of Bristol, in Gloucestershire, is the village of Clifton,
seated on the side of a high hill, extending to the river Avon, the residence
of many persons of fortune. It has a parade, a square, and other handsome
buildings, fitted up for the accommodation of those who resort here for
pleasure, or for health. There are two assembly-rooms, for the amusement of the
company, on the plan of those at Bath.

At the western extremity of Clifton, near the lofty rock of St. Vincent's
rises the Bristol hotsprings; the heat of which, by Fahrenheit's Thermometer,
is 76 degrees.

THIS Description of the Road from London to Bath, will serve to conduct the
traveller from Bath to London, if he reads it from the end to the beginning,
and remembers that those places which in his way down to Bath were represented
to be on the right of the road; in his way back, must be on the left, and vice
versa.

THERE is a second road to Bath from London, as I have observed, to which I
whould give the preference, for many reasons. In the first place, it avoids the
hills between Marlborough and Devizes, and, of course, saves time upon the
journey: secondly, being less frequented, is not so dusty in summer, or so much
worn in winter: thirdly, a traveller is not so likely to be stopped by a run of
post-chaises, or be obliged to go on with tired horses: and, lastly, inns are
not so expensive. This road is through Stains, Hartford-bridge, Basingstoke,
Andover, Luggershal, Everley, and Devizes. To Bath, this way, is one mile more,
but the advantages more than compensate it; the country is equally beaut^f^l.
If we travel it in autumn, we pass throu^h Weyhill Fair, the greatest in the
kingdom; and if we would dispense with a mile or two more on our journey, and
go through Ambresbury, instead of Everley and Devizes, the road is good, and we
pass close by that superb piece of antiquity, the Druidical Temple of
Stonehenge, which every person of taste and curiosity goes to see; and the road
this way is not above two or three miles round.

I know the Bath road through Reading, has been admired for the good
accommodations met with at the different inns, but all inns are now improved;
and there are none that excel Demesay's at Hartford-bridge, and some others on
the way: indeed, the accommodations at Demesay's are so excellent, that the
Royal Family, sensible of it, make a point always of dining or supping there,
in their journey to and from Weymouth.

If the traveller, (let him be of what cast he will) wishes to be amused on his
journey, or at Bath, Dr. Trusler ventures to recommend to his perusal, the two
following books; they will afford him a fund of entertainment, being full of
laughable anecdote, and make him acquainted with the arts, finesse, and
deceptions of the age, in all professions of life. They are a true and very
pointed satire on men and manners, and most of the characters are now living:
though written in the form of Novels, they are good library books, and will
bear reading again and again.

MODERN TIMES, or THE ADVENTURES OF GABRIEL OUTCAST, a Novel, written in
imitation of Gil Blas; 4th Edition, 3 vols. with 12 humourous copper plates,
beautifully engraved. Price 12 s. sewed. All the Reviews speak highly of this
work.

LIFE; or, THE ADVENTURES OF WILLIAM RAMBLE, a sequel to Modern Times, and
written by the same Author -- Price 10 s. 6 d. sewed, 3 vols. with three
copper plates, and two original songs, with the music, by Sterkel and Pleyel.

N. B. The plates of the above Novels were designed by Ibbetson, in his true
spirit of original humor.

Finis.

