A Rational Account OF THE Cause, Nature, and Cure of GLEETS, And other such
WEAKNESSES Usually attending Persons after Former Cures, Self-Abuses, etc.

By the Author of the PRACTICAL SCHEME.

This Book is Given Gratis only at the Four following Places, and no where
else, viz.

Up one Pair of Stairs, between the Rose Tavern and the Pamphlet Shop, at the
Sign of the Celebrated Anodyne Two angels, one at each margin, holding an
outstretched chain between them, held above the rest of the text below the
chain. NECKLACE, (Recommended by the late Dr. Paul Chamberlen) for Childrens
TEETH, etc. without Temple Bar.

At the Sign of the Spanish Lady at the Royal Exchange Back Gate, next
Threadneedle Street.

At the Unicorn an Apothecary's Shop, on St. Margaret's-Hill, in the Borough,
Southwark.

And (for the Convenience of Seafaring Persons) At the Indian Handkercher
facing the New Stairs in Wapping.

Entered in the Hall-Book.

LONDON: Printed by H. Parker, at the Bible in Goswell-street. 1718.

The PREFACE.
SInce what Philosophers say of Naturalists and Physicians, that Ubi Physicus
definit, ibi Medicus incipit; may be applied in another Sense to this present
Treatise, it being designed THERE to Begin, WHERE Venereal Cures generally End:
I shall not here trouble my Readers with any Account at all of the Venereal or
Secret Disease, but refer them to the Three and Twentieth Edition of the
Practical Scheme of that Distemper, and Broken Constitutions; to be had Gratis
where this Book is given away: wherein is given an Account of a certain
Specific Remedy for that Disease, which of late Years has cured; with great
Privacy, Certainty and Expedition great Numbers of Persons, to their entire
Satisfaction, from the slightest Infection, to very bad Cases indeed, without
Fluxing, Astringents, and other such pernicious and dangerous Methods of Cure.
For which Reason to say any thing on that Matter would be only Crambe repetita,
and by consequence rather Tiresome than acceptable to 'em: My present Design
therefore is to Continue here, and not to Repeat that Subject, by presenting my
Readers with a small Discourse which shall Commence, and take its Beginning,
where Treatises on the Secret Disease, and Veneral Cures usually End.

So that this Book is not designed for Persons who have any Degree or Stage of
the Secret Disease Actually upon them, till after they are esteemed Cured, and
have taken Leave of their Physician: And THEN it is, that I address this present
Work to them: In which to proceed in Order and Method I must take notice to my
Reader, that

A GLEET (to apply here the Language of Dr. Keil in another Sense, in the
Preface to his Treatise of Anim^^ Secretion) being a Disorder of one particular
Part of the Animal Economy, whatever adds any new Light to the Knowledge of
This, must necessarily clear the Discovery of the Cause, Seat, and Nature of
That, and by consequence establish its Cure upon a surer Foundation than
hitherto has been done, by enabling us to make a truer, and more certain
Judgment of the Disorder. Since therefore the Animal Body is now known to be a
pure Machine, and many of its Motions and Actions are demonstrated to be the
necessary Consequences of its Structure, it as necessarily follows that the
Symptoms of Diseases in general, and of GLEETS in particular are likewise the
necessary Consequences of the Alteration of the Structures of certain
particular Parts of this Economy. Insomuch that a Gleet (as hereafter will
clearly be showed) as necessarily follows from a Change of this Economy and
Structure of the Part which is its proper Seat, as perfect Health without any
Disorder of a Gleet at all, is the consequence of the perfect Economy of the
Part before any such Change happened.

If a Pendulum of such a Length makes a Clock to go exactly true; does not the
Alteration of this Pendulum as necessarily cause it to go too fast or too slow?
and when all the Movement is known to be in good Order, does not the quick or
slow Motion of the Clock, as necessarily show the Fault of the Pendulum? It is
the same thing in that Part of the Animal Body, which is the Seat of a Gleet:
For the same Reasonings hold good, caeteris paribus in all Sorts of Machines,
whose Motions are the necessary Consequences of their Structures. Now suppose a
Person to be entirely ignorant of the Structure of a Clock or Watch; it is
impossible he should ever be able to put it in right Order, though he had never
so exact a History of its irregular Motions.

It Is on this Account that the Ancients not acquainted with our Modern
Anatomical Discoveries; were wholly ignorant of the true SEAT of the Infirmity
we here treat of; the Know- of which is the only thing capable of informing our
Judgment as to the Cause and Cure of it. This so puzzled them in explicating
it is Nature and Origin; that some placed it in one thing, and some in another,
but None of them in the right; for which reason it was, that the generality of
them missing of its Cure, it began to be reputed an Infirmity and Weakness
truly not much less the Opprobrium Medicorum, then the Gout, and on this
Account it is, that a Gleet (especially if of any date) having eluded the Skill
of very able Physicians, has been by the greatest part of them pronounced
incurable; which Reproach is not at all to be wondered at, since the Seat and
Nature of it was so little understood, and therefore might still have remained
so, had it not been for those most excellent Discoveries of late made by that
great and ingenious Anatomist Mr. Cowper, whose nice Observations of the inward
Frame and Structure of That particular Part where a Gleet is situated, has
given more Light and Information in this our present Question, than all the
Writings of the Ancients put together (the best of which upon this Subject were
only the Effect of a happy Guess, and nothing at all of Certainty or
Demonstration) ever did before. If therefore the Anatomical World, in these
latter Years, had not been indefatigable in the Pursuit of farther Discoveries,
we might have set down to this Day by the glimmering Lights of the old
Anatomists, and satisfy our selves with their Chance Guesses as well in this as
many other Matters. So that to this Ignorance of the true Seat of the Disorder,
has seen all along owing the frequent want of Success in its Cure. For how can
any Person be supposed to form a true Method of Cure for any Ailment or
Infirmity, the Seat (and by Consequence the Nature and Cause) of which he is
not first rightly apprised of?

As to the Motive of publishing this present Treatise, (which I shall endeavor
to perform with as much Circumspection and Wariness, as the Nicety of the
Subject will possibly admit of; and therefore, throughout the whole, I shall
take care not to sully the Chastest Imagination, or give any the least Offense
to the most Modest of Mankind.) it is Twofold:

1st. The great Uneasiness (notwithstanding a daily Change of Linen) which a
great many Gentlemen and others oftentimes for many Years labor under, by
reason of this Infirmity continually upon them, which though for the present may
give no other Trouble, than as it is opposite to Cleanliness, being no pleasant
Companion at all to a Clean Neat Person, yet will in time impair and break the
very best of Constitutions, and bring on a Consumption, as hereafter will
clearly be showed.

2ly The great Inconvenience Persons afflicted with Gleets, and other such
Weaknesses, frequently labor under, from the great Quantities of Physic
exhibited to them for their Cure, which even it self is a Disease, and
oftentimes serves for little else than breaking a sound Constitution, or making
a bad one worse.

In Order therefore to explicate more clearly the true Cause and Nature of
Gleets and other such Weaknesses; and thereby be led into the truest and most
rational Method of their Cure, it will first of all be absolutely necessary to
examine a little the Anatomy of That particular Part, where this Weakness is
situated. As 1st, Its inward Structure and Make. 2ly. What Alterations this its
Structure is subject to, and capable of. 3ly. What Effects such Alterations are
likely to produce. And lastly, Whether or no these Effects are such as
Gentlemen and others find in themselves, who have the Unhappiness of a Gleet,
and other such Weaknesses upon them.

CHAP. I. Some few Anatomical Observations necessary to be taken Notice of, in
order to a right Knowledge of the true Cause, Seat, and Nature of Gleets, and
other such Weaknesses.
BY a GLEET is understood an Involuntary and almost constant Efflux or Dripping
away of Matter from a Human Body, and that in much the same Quantity, whether
the Person be asleep or awake. From which Definition it naturally offers it
self to our Consideration, to enquire into the Cause of this Efflux of Matter,
and how it happens that such a Quantity of Matter should thus Involuntarily
come away. Which Difficulty will easily be removed by examining the inward
Anatomical Structure of the Part where this Weakness is situated, which is the
only thing that can give Light to our present Question: And then to examine if
there is naturally any Liquor separated in that Part, capable of becoming the
Matter of that Epidemical Weakness and common Companion of Mankind, usually
called a GLEET.

It is observable by Anatomy, that in the Nervo-Spongious Substance of the
Urethra or Urinary Passage, there are several Glandulous Openings, first
discovered by that great Anatomist Mr. Cowper, which serve as so many excretory
Ducts or Channels designed by Naure constantly to convey and furnish a certain
viscid, clammy, Mucous kind of Liquor or Moisture into the Urinary Passage; The
Use of which Liquor is to lubricate and besmear, by its Viscidity, the Pipe or
Passage, and thereby to preserve and defend it from being fretted and corroded
by the sharp Salts of the Urine which is daily passing through it, and which,
without this defensative Liquor, would certainly be Fretted, and become Raw,
and by consequence Sore, as any Fleshy Part would be, that should have such a
salt sharp acrimonious fretting Liquor as Urine so often passing on it, unless
it were preserved by some such proper Defensative, as the continual anointing
or besmearing it with some such smooth, soft, balsamic, unctious Substance
would be: Insomuch that were it not for this unctious Liquor or Moisture that
Nature is continually supplying the Urinary Passage with, by means of those
Glandulous Openings abovementioned, to keep it thus moist, it would in a little
time become so fretted and Raw, by the Sharpness of the Urine daily passing
through it, that All Mankind would have a perpetual Scalding and Heat of Urine;
by which I do not mean, that the Urine in it self would be Hotter, in that
Supposition, than it is now, but that the Passage being raw and sore for want
of that defensative slimy Moisture, which now protects it, it would be fretted
by the Saltness of the Urine, and so would smart, and seem as it were to Burn
and Scald, whenever the Urine passed through it: Just as any other Raw Sore Place
divested of its Scarf-Skin, would smart and seem as it were to burn if one
should throw Urine, or Salt Water upon it.

This being thus established from the nice Anatomical Inspection of the
Urethra, we are now to consider what Changes and Alterations these Glandulous
Openings in the Passage, are subject to, and capable of: And then whether or no
such Changes can furnish us with such a large Supply of Matter as daily is
experienced Involuntarily to Drip away from Persons who have that Weakness
commonly called a Gleet upon them. So that a thorough Enquiry into this Matter
will lead us directly into an exact Knowledge of the true Seat, Cause, and
Nature of Gleets, without being put upon any Necessity of having Recourse to
any other Part, that in reality has no manner of Claim to fall under our
present Consideration: As for Example, the Prostatae, or Seminal Vessels, which
though vulgarly esteemed to furnish the Matter of a Gleet, yet have no Share at
all in it; and for this Reason it is, that the Vulgar commonly, though very
ignorantly and improperly call a Gleet a Gonorrhaea, which are widely
different, as hereafter will appear; the true and only Seat of a Gleet, being
the Urethra, or Urinary Passage, as by and by will clearly be made appear.

Our next Endeavor therefore must be to examine how the Urethra only and the
Glandulous Openings abovementioned which it contains, are able to furnish so
great a quantity of Matter, as is observed to be involuntarily discharged in
the course of a Gleet. In order to which we must consider, That Nature
designing these Glands in the Urethra constantly to furnish and supply a
certain Moisture to the whole Pipe or Passage, which may defend it from being
fretted by the sharp Urine so frequently passing through it, as has been
already showed, the Orifices or Mouths of these Glands in entire healthy,
sound, hail Persons are in some measure, (if I may use the Comparison servata
always debita proportione) like the Sphincter Muscles of the Anus, Bladder,
etc. I mean by this, that the openings of these Glands, notwithstanding their
being so very small, have a certain Springiness and Elasticity proportionable
to their Bigness and Size, belong ing to them, by which they are endowed with a
certain power of straitning, contracting and drawing themselves, togather more
or less upon every Emission of that Moisture Nature designs them to supply the
Urethra with: just as the Sphincter Muscle of the Bladder is endowed with a
Power of retaining, holding, and keeping in the Urine. And by this means it is,
that just so much and no more of this Moisture is thrown out of these Glands
into the Urethra, than is just necessary for the Lubrication and Moistening of
it, preparatively for the passage of the Urine. Nor is this at at all to be
questioned, viz. That the Orifices and Mouths of these small minute Glands in
the passage, have every one of them a proper power of opening and contracting
themselves, proportionable to their bigness and size, not unlike, as I just now
said, to the Sphincter Muscles in other Parts of the Body, since we see that
even a small Mite, taken for Example out of corrupted Cheese, and which is
scarce discernable by the naked Eye, yet by the help of a good Microscope, it
appears to be an Animal as completely furnished with all necessary Parts, as
other Animals whose size makes them the conspicuous Objects of our unassisted
Sight So that as by reason of the strength and vigor of the Sphincter Muscles,
for Example of the Bladder; the Neck and Mouth of it is endowed with a power of
straitening, contracting and closing it self together after every Emission of
Urine, every one experiences in themselves a power of either holding or letting
go their Water: So, much in the same manner, by reason of the strength and
vigor of the Orifices of these Glandules, they are endowed with not an unlike
power of straitening, contracting, and drawing themselves together (which I
desire my Reader always to suppose to be in a degree proportionable still to
their Bigness) after every Emission of the mucous slimy Liquor they contain:
Which strength being once lost, the power also of retaining and keeping in this
Liquor is also lost with it. The State then and Condition of these Glandulous
openings (or as Dr. Drake calls them Mucous Glands) from their thus furnishing
and supplying the Passage with this Mucous Liqor,) being thus considered in
healthy Persons. Our next Enquiry must be into the state of these Mucous Glands
in Persons afflicted with a Gleet. Which state we shall soon be apprised of by
considering that when a Person has been under Cure for the Secret Disease, the
fatigue of Antivenereal Medicines, especially if ill administered, by a frequent
pressure upon, and irritation of these Glands, has rendered them flaccid,
limber, weak, and loose, which before were healthy, vigorous, springy and
strong. The truth of these Assertions (abstracting from the reasonableness they
carry along with them) will appear by giving my Reader an Account of the state
of these Glands as they have been observed in some Anatomical Dissections made
of that particular part where all Gleets are seated, I mean the Urethra or
Urinary Passage.

That great Anatomist Mr. Cowper tells us, that to inform himself the better in
this Point, he Dissected the Urinary Passage of several Criminals who had been
Executed: Some of which were healthy found Persons: The others were Executed
with Gleets upon them. In the healthy sound Persons, he found these Glandulous
openings to be so firm, as to have had a perfect Elasticity, or Springiness:
Insomuch that upon pressing them, he says, they discharged a certain quantity
of a transparent viscous Liquor, such as it shows it self, and ought to be in
statu sano; whereas if these Glands had not had such a firmness and strength,
in which consisted their power of retaining or letting go the viscid clammy
Liquor they contain; this Liquor would have slipped out of them without any
Pressure at all: And by consequence, its not owzing out, but upon such a
pressure, was an evident mark of their springyness and strength. He also
observed the whole Urethra to be besmeared and lined with a Liquor of a viscous
clammy contexture, which he supposed to have been discharged from these
Glandulae Mucosae, in order to lubricate the Passage.

But in the Urethra of Criminals Executed with a Gleet actually upon them, and
which they had had many Years, the Case was quite different. He observed the
Mucous Glands to be limber, flaccid, and loose, very much stretched and
dilated: And their Orifices by the help of a nice Microscope to be visibly
open, and thereby totally destitute of their Strength and Vigor, from whence
he judiciously concluded, that they were also entirely deprived of their
retentive Faculty and Springyness, having no power left of contracting
themselves upon any emission of that mucous clammy Liquor they contain, as
those other Glands could do in the Criminals that were Executed in perfect
Health. After this he examined in the Executed Criminals that were thus
dissected, the state of the Prostatae, the Vesiculae Seminales and the
Parastatae, all which he found to be as perfectly sound and entire, as in any
healthy Person he ever dissected in his life; which is a convincing Proof, that
neither the Prostatae, Vesiculae Seminales nor the Parastatae have any the
least share at all in the Seat or Cause of a Gleet. This will appear still more
clear, by an Example from Persons who have a Diabetes upon them: For from the
loss of the Springiness and Tone of the Sphincter Muscle of the Bladder; the
Neck and Mouth of it is so weakened and relaxed, as to be deprived of its
retentive Faculty, through a want of that power of contracting and drawing it
self together after any Emission of Urine which healthy Persons experience in
themselves: from whence it follows, that the Urine comes away involuntarily
from them, being altogether deprived of both that Expulsive, as well as
Retentive power which healthy Persons have.

These Observations being thus premised, and which are fully sufficient to
convince any one whose Eyes are not shut against demonstration, that what the
Ancients generally thought as to the Cure of Gleets was built upon a very wrong
Foundation: viz. An erroneous Notion of its Cause and Seat. We must now enquire
how it happens that this change of state of these Mucous Glands, viz. from an
Elastick, Springy, and strong state, to a limber, loose, and flaccid one can
produce and be the Cause of that quantity of Matter which continually drips and
comes away in the course a Gleet: Or in other Terms, (but the meaning is still
the same) whether or no the productive cause of a Gleet i. e. the Relaxation of
the Orifices of the mucous Glands in the Urethra can so far increase the
quantity of Liquor naturally produced by these Glands, as to be such as is
daily experienced by Gentlemen and others who have this Infirmity upon them.

CHAP. II. How the Weakness and flaccid State abovementioned of the Mucous
Glands, and their Orifices or Mouths in the Urethra, are the true Cause of
Glects,
THE Springiness and retentive Faculty of the Mucous Glands in the Urethra of
healthy sound Persons who are supposed never to have had the Secret Disease
upon them consisting in their Strength and Power of either disating or
contracting their Orifices or Ostiola, (as in the foregoing Chapter has been
showed) by which Power of retaining or letting out the viscous Liquor they
contain, they discharge just so much and no more of it, than is just necessary
for the lubrication and besmearing of the Passage: it must of Necessity follow,
that when these Glands are, by the long Use of Medicines, or other means, as a
long Continuance of the Disease etc. so weakened as to become limber, flaccid,
flabby, and loose, they must also be deprived of this retentive Power or
Faculty. Insomuch that although these Glands in healthy sound Persons, who never
had the Misfortune of the Secret Disease, are naturally so Springy and Strong
as to discharge and let out into the Urethra, just so much and no more of the
slimy Liquor designed by Nature to besmear, and as it were cover over the whole
Tube or Passage, and there by defend it from the Sharpness of the Urine: Yet in
most Persons who have been ever cured of the Secret Disease, the Case is
generally speaking not so. For the Orifices or Ostiola of these Glands in these
Cured Persons, are so weakened and relaxed by the Fatigue of the Disease, and
its Cure, as to be in a manner always open, by which means the Mucous Liquor
they contain, is continually slipping out of them into the Urethra; the
Openings of these Glands not having Springiness, Elasticity, nor Strength left
to contract themselves, and thereby to keep it in as formerly; by which means
the contained Liquor involuntarily and continually comes out into the Urethra,
and by successive Quantities of it pushing one after another drips and owzes
away Involuntarily from the Body.

The Difficulty then that now remains is to conceive how such very small Glands
and their Orifices can furnish such a Quantity of Matter, as is daily
experienced to flow away in some Gleets, and how the Mucous Liquor which is
naturally discharged out of these Glands into the Urethra in healthy Persons,
should be increased to such a degree as it is in Persons who have a Gleet. This
Difficulty will easily be removed to any Person who will but allow that the
Mucous Glands in the Urethra, although so very small in themselves as to be
invisible to the Naked Eye, unless assisted by the Help of a Microscope, yet
they may naturally secerne such a Quantity of Fluid in any determinate Time, as
is fully sufficient to become the Matter of (that common Accident now adays) a
Gleet.

To illustrate this Matter, I hope it will be allowed that these Mucous Glands,
as little as they are, may naturally discharge into the Urethra for its
Lubrication, as much of this Liquor in one Minute as may weigh at least one
Quarter of a Grain: This in an Hour will be 15 Grains, or a Quarter of a Dram:
In 24 Hours, or a natural Day, it will amount to 6 Drams, which is 3 Quarters
of an Ounce; a Quantity sufficient in all reason to give that Uneasiness to the
Person, as well as Wetness to the Linen, which is usually experienced by those
under the uncomfortable Circumstances of a Gleet: And which is more than either
the Vesiculae Seminales or the Prostatae can continue to furnish in any
considerable Space of Time, without infinite more Detriment to the Body, than
Persons afflicted with Gleets usually experience. Hence it is evident that the
Glands the Urethra are full as capable of being the Springs that supply the
Liquor that Drips away in a Gleet, as the Prostatae, or any other pretended
Part situated at a Distance.

If you ask, how these Glands in the Urethra can discharge so great a Quantity
of Fluid in the time of a Gleet, above what they do in their natural State. I
answer, that it is manifest from the Animal Economy, that if any Gland or
excretory Duct be Weakened, and deprived of its retentive Faculty, the Quantity
of Liquor that it discharges, by Reason of that Weakness, is considerably
augmented in Proportion to the greater or less Degrce of Weakness with which
these Glands or Ducts are affected: Just as a little Powder of Cantharides
applied any where, by breaking through the Texture of the Cuticular Scarf-Skin,
does so weaken the Glands as soon to excite a Blister, and by it thus weakening
the Glands, makes them discharge a Quantity of Matter immensly greater than
what would naturally flow away from that Part by insensible Perspiration only.
Much in the same Manner the Orifices of these Glands being weakened and
relaxed, have thereby lost their retentive Faculty, and therefore cannot hold
in the Liquor they contain, but lets more of it slip away than the mere
Lubrication of the Urethra requires, and therefore it continually is
discharging it self by that Dripping, which is commonly called a Gleet.

Hence all the Difficulties about a Gleet are overcome in a few Words; Its
Symptoms become obvious upon a small Principle so clear in Anatomy, as to carry
not only Evidence along with it, but also more clearly explicates all the
Symptoms and Effects of it, than hitherto is observed to have been done.

But besides a Gleet from the abovementioned Causes it frequently happens, that
some Persons after even a safe and sure Cure of the Secret Disease, especially
where the Infection has been confiderable, have for a long Time after been
vexed with the Appearance of a little owzing of a slimy transparent Substance
not so much as the Quantity of a Drop at a Time; which upon their Linen looks
sometimes of no ill Color, though also sometimes it will give it a yellowish
Tinge no bigger perhaps than a great Pin's Head, which frequently alarms 'em,
they thinking some Infection lies still lurking, when the Cause in reality has
been over-weakness, and overheating of the Parts etc. and which, upon
endeavoring to carry off by Purging, has rather increased, by relaxing the
Vessels, and weakening their Springiness and and Tone: Persons with such Gleets
as these, have generally little Threads, and Skins, or such like, swimming in
Variety of Figures about their Urine, and the Orifice of the Urinary Passage is
frequently gumm'd up therewith. These Gleets usual attend hot sanguine
Constitutions, and in Time brings on pains and Weakness in the Loins, and has
at last terminated in incureable Consumptions, whereas if some strengthening
Medicines peculiarly adapted to those Parts, had but at first been judiciously
applied, not only the Disorder it self might have been timely cured, but also
these ill Consequences happily prevented. By which Medicines I understand such
as are appropriated to restore the injured Parts to a State of Soundness, as
well as to preserve them so. Thus if the Tone of the Parts be but reestablished
by Proper Restorative Medicines, their acquired Strength will enable them to
resist the Ingress of new Supplies of peccant Matter, and turn them off to be
discharged another way. Thus the Cure is attained without Violence, Pain, or
Inconvenience to the Patient: and in this Sense it is (generally speaking) to
be understood, that sometimes a Gleet will remain after the best of Cures.

CHAP. III. Of Self Abuses in particular, and how they are the Causes of
Gleets, Simple Gonorrhaeas, and other dreadful Effects.
THE Missortune I here mean is that which the Holy Scriptures mention, Genesis c.
38. v. 10, of Onan, Whose Name only will put my Reader at once in mind, not
only of the Sin, but also of the terrible Punishment, which Almighty God
instantly and out of hand inflicted upon him, expressed in these Words, And
therefore the Lord Cut him off, because he had done a Detestable Thing. Ideo
percussit eum Dominus quod rem DETESTABILEM faceret, says the Vulgate Edition.
And yet notwithstanding so very severe an Expression of the Scripture, this
Unhappy Misfortune is so frequent, and crying an Offense, especially amongst
the more Flourishing Part of Man kind, that there is a great deal of Reason to
imagine that many Delinquents would never have been such, if they had but been
thoroughly apprised of the Heinousness of the Crime, and the very sad
Consequences to the Body, as well as the Soul, which follow from it; And which
indeed is the Motive that has induced me to the writing of this Chapter.

But as it is very difficult to write on a Subject of so nice a Nature as this
is, within the reach of the meanest Capacities, without making some
Encroachment upon the Rules and Bounds of Decency, and the Risque of giving
some Offense, notwithstanding it may proceed from a Design to promote Virtue,
and discourage Vice: I shall therefore rather choose to express my self so as
to be less intelligible to some, by leaving several Things to my Readers
private Consideration, than by an overfreedom of Expression, to run the hazard
of putting that into any chaste Mind, which every Person ought with the utmost
Christian Courage and Care to stifle and destroy. Subjects of this Nature being
as Dr. Baynard calls it, Res faeda dictu, and the Scripture, a detestable
Thing, and what (if mere Necessity did not urge) St. Paul forbids even to be so
much as NAMED amongst Christians, Nec nominetur in vobis: For which reason if
ever Caution, Care, and Circumspection is necessary in the Treating of any
Moral Subject in the World, it is most certainly in this: Wherein St. Paul
thought he could express the Enormity of the Crime by no Word more Emphatical
and Expressive, than by imposing a perpetual Silence of it amongst those
Persons, whose not only Name, but Life and Conversation, spoke them to be
Christians; for which Reason it was, that an Ancient Author thought he could
give no better a Mark to distinguish between Christians and Heathens, who being
totally absorpt, drowned, and given up to a Reprobate Sense, Uncleanness, and
their own Passions, they dishonored their own Bodies, (to use the Expression
of the Scripture) then the Purity of Life and Conversation in the Former, and
not in their outward Name and Profession only; and therefore says he, We
Christians Non magn^ Loquimur, sed VIVIMUS.

I doubt not but those Persons whose guilty Conscience shall tell them that
they are concerned in this present Chapter, will understand the Meaning of it,
without much Explication: And it is to them I recommend it, with my hearty
Desire of their most serious Consideration of what is contained in it: And as
for those whom it no way concerns, and by consequence who understand it not (O
happy Ignorance!) I cougratulate them their unspotted Innocence, Rara Avis in
terris,! I Will endeavor to say nothing which shall endanger their loosing, but
rather confirm their happy keeping it.

To proceed therefore in our Subject: By this Doctrine is excluded every even
the least Impure and Immodest Action as unlawful, and to be banished the
Conversation of Christians, whose Characteristick Mark ought to be Modesty, as
being thereby the very T^^^^s of the Holy Chost; than which Consideration St.
Paul thought he could produce no one more powerful, to dissuade Christians from
all manner of Uncleanness whatsoever. The Apostles Argument is this: That if
Material Temples, dedicated only to the external Worship of Almighty God, are
in no wise to be prosaned; much less Spiritual ones, such as our Bodies are, in
which the Spirit of Almighty God inhabits. This Reflection of St. Paul, gives
us clearly to understand, that whenever we give our selves over to Uncleanness,
our Bodies are no more the Temples of the Holy Ghost: For which Reason he tells
us expressly, that not being our own, by consequence we are not at our own
Disposal, being Bought with a great Price, and ought therefore to be so far
from Abusing and defiling our selves, that we ought to glorify God in even our
BODIES, which are God's, as well as our Spirits, all which is utterly destroyed
by those Misfortunes this Chapter here treats of.

My Reader may therefore take this for a general Rule, that a Christian is
bound to shun whatever Sensualizes the Soul, and tends only to gratify unlawful
(i. e. out of a Conjugal State) Passions, it being always unlawful out of that
State, to draw any immodest Pleasure from our own Bodies, on any Pretense
whatsoever.

To condemn therefore, and dissuade against a Sin, so very displeasing to
Almighty God: So detrimental to the Commonwealth: And so highly injurious to
our selves, requires no Arguments which are not entirely agreeable to Truth,
and can stand the Test of the strictest Reason.

First, Its being a very great Offense against Almighty God, sufficiently
appears, in that there is not a Place in Holy Writ, where Sins of Uncleanness
are condemned, but that Unhappy One this Chapter treats of, is amongst others
hinted at, with a Conclusion, that Nothing Impure, nor who acts any such
Abominable Things, shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God: but are to have a
Part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone: And although it is a Saying no
less true than Terrible, of an Ancient Author, that Sinners are always Sure of
their Sin, and Uncertain of their Pardon; yet from what has hitherto been said,
all Persons herein concerned ought seriously to betake themselves to true
Repentance, and that betimes too, lest by Neglect in the End they
misfortunately find themselves in the Circumstances of Antiochus, of whom it is
related, that Orabat Scel^sius Dominum, a quo non esset misericordiam
consecuturus. The Case of too many delayed ('till on a Deathbed) Repentance.
Nor ought the Example of the Good Theif's late Repentance, to embolden any
Delay. Because (as an Ancient Author very well says,) that the Scripture
furnishes us with this Example, that we may not Despair: But it is the only
one, that we may not Presume. The best Mark therefore of a true and sincere
Repentance, is to leave off Sinning betimes, and returning no more to it after
a Conversion: Noli amp^us pec care, ne aliquid tib^ deterius contingat.

2ly, The Detriment which this Misfortune brings to a Commonwealth in general,
no less appears from so many noble Families being frequently extinct for want
of Heirs, which, were it to be traced up to its true Origin, is owing to
nothing else but the Misfortune we here treat of, by which the Strength of
Youth has been so profusely squandred away, that very few can afterward much
boast of the Fruits of a Married State. But suppose such Persons have Children,
which happens not often, they are most commonly Weak; Puny, Little Things, that
either die soon, or if they happen by Chance and mere Force more of Physic
than the Kitchen, to grow up, they become Tender Sickly Persons, always ailing
and complaining of one Malady or another.

What a Pleasure is it to see, says an Ancient Author, a Man at the Age of
Fourscore, with a Wife near the same Antiquity, both blessed with healthy hail
Constitutions, fresh wholesome Looks, sound Minds, and perfect Senses, ( Men's
Sana in Corpore sano, as Juvenal says) with active, strait, upright Limbs,
walking without the adventitious Support of either Stick or Staff, and cheerful
Tempers, residing over a healthful numerous Progeny perhaps to the 3d. or 4th
Generation; and all these Blessings owing under Almighty God to the Temperance
and Continence of their Youths: And now willing in a good Old Age, to resign
their Breath in Peace. Et factus est in Pace locus ejus. -- When if we do but
turn our Eyes upon Licentious Livers, we shall find them surrounded with a
whole Legion and Complication of Diseases: Lean Jaws, hagged pale livid Looks,
hollow Eyes sunk into their Heads, feeble Hams, Legs without Calves, limping
and hobling with a Stick, Gouty unactive Limbs, continually complaining of
Weaknesses and Pains in the Small of their Backs; in fine, worn and wasted away
in the Prime of their Years by such self-Defilements: And in their latter
Years, by Gleets, Gonorrhaeas and Consumptions, their Spirits sunk, Body
wasted, Strength decayed, still shifting about for change of Air; trying all
the Baths in Christendom; always consulting one Physician or another, and yet
after all, upon the least Rigor of any Season, or any other small Accident, to
give up their sinful (and it is well if not almost despairing) Breath; and all
this from having Enervated, Exhausted, Consumed, and Worn out their Bodies and
Strength with the SINS OF THEIR YOUTHS, and by which Means they are now become
a Jest to others, and oftentimes thought (though how unjustly, plainly appears to
any one that only confiders the unhappy Conduct of their flourishing Youthful
Days) the Reproach of Physicians, and a Torment to themselves; and all these
^^ain of Disorders the sole Effect of their Abusing ^^emselves in their Youths.
What Pangs and Tortures have such Persons in reflecting on the past Actions of
their Lives, who hardly come at half the Age they might reasonably have
expected to arrive at, find themselves enervated, exhausted, consumed, and WORN
OUT by the SINS OF THEIR YOUTHS? What a dismal Thing is it for a Person thus to
to see that they are old, and have destroyed themselves oftentimes before they
are even 30 Years of Age? Insomuch that no Sin draws its Slaves and Votaries
into a greater Abyss of Evils and Ruin than this.

As to the Injuries Persons do themselves by this miserable Practice, they are
no less evident, since of such Persons who have these Abominarions in their
Youth prostrated and enervated their Strength, very few ever come to that
Strength and Robustness, which otherwise they would have arrived at, befides
Stranguries, Gleets, Gonorrhaeas, and other such Weaknesses, far more difficult
to be Cured than those Contracted from either the Secret Disease or its Cure:
So that we'll suppose 2 Persons to be afflicted with Gleets: One of these
Gleets is purely the Effect of the Secret Disease and its Cure, in a Person
whom we will suppose never to have been in all their Life Guilty of the
Misfortune this Chapter treats of. The other Gleet is not only the Effect of
the Secret Disease and its Cure, but also is on a Person whom we'll suppose to
be concerned in this Chapter: This last Gleet is much harder to Cope with and
Cure, than the Former: The Reason of this will be obvious to every Person who
does but consider, that such detestable Actions, being altogether Unnatural, by
consequence are so many Violences, Strains, and Forces upon and against Nature;
and therefore not only the Mucous Glands in the Passage, but even the
Prostatae, Parastatae, and Seminal Vessels themselves, are so extremely
Relaxed, Debilitated, Weakened, and Enervated thereby, that it is no wonder that
the whole Constitution pays dearly for it afterward; as the Gonerality of
Persons too fatally experience, who ever in their Youths have been guilty of
this abominable Practice; Insomuch that many Young Persons, who were strong and
lusty before they abandoned themselves to this Vice, have been so entirely Worn
out and Ruined by it, as to become Old before half their Years came on: For by
thus robbing themselves of their Strength, and empoverishing their Spirits by
depriving their Bodies of its Balmy and Vital Juice by this abominable
Practice, they have become so dry and emaciated, as to be sent to their Graves,
a great many Years sooner than otherwise they would have been.

Perhaps my Reader may ask of me, that since the Weakness of Mankind and
Propension to Ill is so very great, that if we run through the whole Decalogue,
there is not one Precept whose Transgressors deserve more Commiseration and
Pity than this: What way must Youth preserve themselves from it? No one's
Strength being to be depended on in this Point, for those who think themselves
secure, St. Paul charges to take Care least they fall: So that if we trust only
to our Reason, we shall find in the End that this is no manner of Match at all
to our Inclinations, which are infinitely stronger: Insomuch that whoever beats
a Parley with Sensual Pleasures, is already capitulating with his Enemy, and
will be vanquished at last. The great Preservative then is chiefly to avoid
Idleness, and fly all Occasions of Ill: Apprehende Fugam, (says an Ancient
Author) si vis habere Victoriam. For Qui tangit Picem, as surely inquinabitur
ab ea, As he who loves Periculum, most certainly sooner or later in illo
peribit. And therefore they will find to their Sorrow, that a short Fleeting
Pleasure of only a Moment, in fine mordebit ut Coluber: Like a poor silly Fly
hovering about the Flame, thinking it to be as sweet as it appears fair,
perishes at the first Trial. And however such Persons may through the Instigation
of the Devil flatter themselves, that whenever the Fact is committed, that it
is but a trifling Fault; yet it has so Tarnished their Soul, that afterward
they can have no Innocence to boast of, having prodigally Bartered it for a
momentary Satisfaction, as Esau did with his Birthright, for the transient
Sensuality of a Mess of Pottage; the Barrier that fenced their Chastity being
broke, the Enemy to Purity and Holiness makes daily Incursions, and ravages
through every Passage of the Conquered Soul. And although by a demure outward Be
haviour and Carriage, the Eyes of Men may be deceived, yet an All-seeing God
cannot be hindered from witnessing an Act which his Holiness so much
abominates, as to exclude us (without true Repentance for it) eternally from
the Kingdom of Heaven: A Loss, to balance which our Savior expressly tells
us, that the whole World is not an Aequivalent, What Profit is it to a Man to
gain the whole World, if he loses his own Soul.

How many unhappy Souls are there in the World, who never would have been
guilty of enormous Crimes, if they had not in their Youths been initiated in
Sin by this unhappy Practice? And how many again are there, whose Affairs in
the World Almighty God has attended with Judgments ever since, as a Punishment
of such horrid Facts committed formerly in their Youth. To avert all which the
only way is to practice Virtue betimes, and early to leave off these
Abominations: And whatever Difficulty is experienced in overcoming a vicious
Habit, the persons must consider, that it is a Burden of their own making, and
therefore they ought the more cheerfully to undergo the overcomeing it.

CHAP. 4. Of a Simple Gonorrhaea, whence it proceeds, and how it differs from a
common Gleet.
BEsides the Infirmity hitherto treated of, there is yet another sort of
Weakness of much worse Consequence, and which for the resemblance it bears to a
Gleet, is often confounded under the same Name by Persons unacquainted with the
Difference, whereas in rigor it is no such thing, and is properly called a
Simple Gonorrhaea, to distinguish it from that virulent Efflux of Matter
commonly, though very improperly called a Gonorrhaea, and is That which afflicts
Persons who have actually the Secret Disease.

A Simple Gonorrhaea is an involuntary Emission of a real seminal Matter by
reason of the Caruncles through which it owzes from the Neck of the Vesiculae
seminales into the Urethra being so injured, weakened and relaxed in their
Fibers, as to permit the seminal Matter insensibly to come away. This is an
Infirmity that may indeed, but does not often happen; and when it does, the
Person in a little time grows lean, pale, weak and feeble, especially about the
Loins, and is soon brought into a Tales Dorsalis, and if not speedily taken
care of, to his Grave. So that notwithstanding the vulgar call almost every
involuntary emission of Matter from a human Body a Gonorrhaea, ye^ this
Infirmity last mentioned is only and truly a Gonorrhaea or Efflux of real and
true seminal Matter. Wherea^ neither in a Gleet, nor in any Stage or Degree of
the Secret Disease, any true Seminal Matter comes away, as i^ manifest from
what has been already said of a Gleet; and also in the First Chapter of the
Practical Scheme abovementioned concerning a Gonorrhaea. So that a Gleet, which
is commonly tho most improperly called a Gonorrhaea, is in reality nothing but
only a dripping or owzing away of that mucous slimy Liquor, separated by the
Glands in the Urethra for the lubrication of it, as has been above fully said,
and generally speaking, free from any Venereal Infection: So that a Person may
have a Gleet upon them a considerable time without being so visibly emaciated
and weakened as they would be in a very small time by a Simple Gonorrhaea: Though
nevertheless, to let a Gleet run on from Year to Year as many do, without
seeking a Remedy for it, is a most certain Means to bring on a Consumption, as
hereafter will be showed.

A Simple Gonorrhaea is caused by Falls, Strains, lifting too great a Weight,
Wrestling, violent Riding, Running, Jumping, carrying of heavy Burdens, etc.
and is so very difficult an Infirmity to Cure, as oftentimes to be even
incurable. But as for a Gleet, it is only after Venereal Cures, or some certain
over-strainings and Self-abuses, too much or unskilful Purging, etc. Insomuch
that through a very great weakness and relaxation of the Orifices of the Glands
in the Urethra from the abovementioned Causes, a great many Persons have been
left with seeming incurable Gleets upon them, though under the Care of otherwise
reputed ingenious Men in their Profession: For which Reason it is, that few
Persons get clear of a Clap without more or less of a Gleet.

From what has hitherto been said, it appears that the true Seat of a simple
Gonorrhaea is in the seminal Vessels: Whereas the Seat of a virulent Running
and a Gleet is in no other Part than the Urethra, as fully has already been
showed, and also in the First Chapter of the Practical Scheme. And it is for
want of a true distinction in this Point that so many People are ruined by
improper Applications, from an erroneous Notion of the Seat of the Disease.

Moreover, besides the abovementioned causes of a Simple Gonorrhaea; an efflux
of Matter very much resem^^ing it frequently follows from the Prostate Glands
themselves, having been in a manner so worn, as to be almost ^aten, fretted,
and corroded away; or at least have been extremely relaxed and debilitated by
their being so continually ulcerated as they frequently are in many Patients
under Cure for the Secret Disease: Or if not this, they at least have been ver^
much heated and distended by repeated strong Purgations; by which means the
Tone of the Parts had been so relaxed and destroyed, as to cause a thin seminal
Matter almost continually to flow away from the Urethra, which Fluxion, though
commonly called a Gleet, yet in rigor it is a kind of a simple Gonorrhaea, and
is frequently the consequence and result of preposterous management and ill
finished Cures.

Chap. 5. Of Weaknesses in Women.
THese are Infirmities I should here take no Notice of, if it were not for the
sake of a great many Virtuous Persons laboring under them, who to besure will
send for this little Book in expectation of Assistance from it, and in hopes
thereby to avoid the Shock of discovering and making known those Ailments to
others which most who labor under them use their utmost diligence to Screen
and Hide: That therefore this present little Tract may not be defective, but
fully answer whatever can be expected from its Title: These Weaknesses being
inconveniences which although some Women are more subject to then others, yet at
some time or another so many labor under them, that scarce any are wholly
exempt from them: And what is still worse, out of such great Numbers as are
afflicted with them, very few ever get a true and solid Cure, either through a
difficulty in themselves to discover 'em: Or a neglect of their Cure, by
thinking them trivial Infirmities, which time will Cure, without considering
the ill consequences they will produce: Or for want of Judgment in those that
undertake their Cure, they through a bashfulness of discovering their Case to
Persons of Skill, consult only such whose knowledge reaches no farther then
Turpentine Pills, Bole Armenick and Astringents, Archangel, Clary and other
such like things, as insignificant to many, as the Judgment was defective that
prescribed them.

I must here therefore take Notice, That the Imperfections observable in most
Accounts of these Weaknesses (for by this Name of WEAKNESS, I shall always for
Decency sake throughout this Chapter mean the Subject it treats of) hitherto
published, and the shocking expressions in describing them, have induced me to
say some thing on this subject, which I Will endeavor to do in such a manner as
may lead those of my Readers to whom this Chapter only belongs, into a true
knowledge of their State, and Method of its Cure, with as little Information to
others not concerned in it (I mean the Men) as possibly the Subject will admit
of. -- These Weaknesses are of much the same Nature as Gleets in Men: For as
the abovementioned relaxed and weakened Mucous Glands in the Urethra or Urinary
Passage, separate and discharge that Matter which constitutes a GLEET in Men;
so (observing a requisite Proportion) other Cervical Glandules or small Vessels
of the same Nature proportionably in the Neck of the Womb in Women, and
designed for much the same Use of lubricating it, separates and discharges also
the Matter of these Weaknesses; So that these Glandules being rendered Weak,
Lax, and Loose, and thereby deprived of their natural due Tone and Springyness,
either from the ill Constitution of the Stomach, and a Serosity or Crude Chyle
in the Mass of Blood, depraved by Distempers, or some ill Accidents, by which
Means those Vessels cannot sufficiently retain the proper Humor separated by
them from the Blood, for much the same use proportionably as in Men, viz. to
Lubricate or Moisten the Passage tho for another end, but let it Gleet thus
involuntarily and slide away. And although Women being of a more cold and moist
Habit of Body then Men; and on that account, and some others more liable to be
afflicted with these WEAKNESSES then Men are with Gleets: Yet a Gleet in Men,
and these Weaknesses in Women are oftentimes one and the same Disease, and owe
their Origin very often to the same Causes, which generally in Men are Venereal
ones, tho not always so in Women: but sometimes Hard and Difficult Labors,
Colds or Hurts in Lying in, especially in weak and diseased Habits of Body, and
many other Accidents which attend the Sex. But to speak the Truth: Gleets in
Men most commonly owe their beginning to the Secret Disease, and so sometimes
does also these Weaknesses in Women; the Infection of which having been carried
off, the Eibres in the Ostiola or Excretory Ducts of ^he Glands so often
abovementioned, are not easily resto^ed in either Sex, to their pristine Tone,
Strength, and Vigor, but will remain relaxed and weak: From whence (...)
Weeping or Dripping properly called a Gleet in Men, and Weaknesses in Women,
will, (especially in an ill habit of Body) for a long time after remain; unless
proper Measures be taken for a Cure.

From what has been hitherto said plainly appears what a Simple Gonorrhaea
(which very seldom happens) and what a Gleet in Men; and what Weaknesses in
Women are (which are very common Infirmities.) They are all (generally
speaking) free from any Infection, and can never (let Practitioners say what
they please to fright timorous Patients) degenerate into the Venereal Disease.
These Weaknesses as well as Gleets in Men are generally esteemed very hard to
Cure, and so indeed frequently they are, but if proper Measures and Means be
but taken; both Men and Women, may in a competent time, and without much
inconvenience be freed from these troublesome and disagreeable Companions,
especially to Neat and Cleanly Persons.

There are few Women especially of the Weaker Sort, but at one time or other
are aflicted with these Weaknesses, they being an Infirmity often attendant
upon, and caused by concomitant or preceding Distempers: Insomuch that
generally speaking whatever Disease reduces a Woman to a languid weakly State,
it is commonly succeeded by this Indisposition: For which Reason Women that are
naturally of a more weak Constitution or Habit of Body than ordinary, are more
subject to these Weaknesses than others.

Some Women indeed have these Weaknesses much more moderate than others, and
not continually, but at certain Times only, without causing any great or
remarkable Prostration of Strength 'till after a Year or 2 or more: But then it
becomes more violent and dangerous, weakening the Body excessively, and is then
much more hard to cure. This being a known and undoubted Truth, that the longer
these Weaknesses have afflicted the Patient, and the larger in Quantity they
are, the longer Time will be required, and the more difficult will it be, to
accomplish the Cure, the Humors being more habituated to come away, and the
Glandules in the Vessels more weakened and spoiled.

It is equally as hard a matter as it is useful for a Physician sometimes to
distinguish well between these Weaknesses and other Distempers which resemble
them, their Consequences and their Cure being widely different: For Numbers of
Women who have met with ill Husbands, have labored under the Venereal or
Secret Disease for some Years together, still imagining it to be that Weakness
this present Chapter treats of.

Thus it being very difficult for Women to distinguish these Distempers, and
yet absolutely necessary that they should, it may (generally speaking,) be done
by this Rule of Hippocrates, which although for Decency sake I shall be very
cautious in expressing, yet those Persons to whom this Chapter belongs, and is
designed for, will sufficiently comprehend. The Rule is this. That these
Weaknesses, of which this present Chapter Treats, ceases in Women at certain
Periodical Times, and do not trouble them 'till such Times are over. Whereas a
Venereal Running remains constantly upon the Patient, and does nor cease at any
Time.

Many are the deplorable Ill Effects of these Weaknesses, (the unhappy
Companion of Womankind) if not in time remedied; but as this Subject s more
proper for the following Chapter, where I shall treat at large of the ill
Consequences of these Weaknesses, I shall refer my Readers to it.

CHAP. VI Of the Ill Consequences and Effects of Gleets, and other such
Weaknesses
A Great many Persons not knowing, or at least not reflecting, and considering
the ill Consequences of Gleets and other such Weaknesses, look upon them as
trivial Infirmities which Time and Patience will Cure: Whereas, although at
present, these Infirmities may give no other uneasiness or trouble than what is
opposite to Neatness and Cleanliness, being no grateful Companions to a clean
neat Man, yet by their continuance greatly empair the Health, by wasting the
Body, and bringing it into a visible Consumption. The reason of which is: A
Gleet may in some measure, and not improperly be compared to an Issue, which
seems as a Receptacle for the Humors of the whole Body, but more especially of
the adjacent Parts to run to; so that Persons who have a Gleet, or any other
like Weakness upon them, have thereby a constant Drain to their Body, which as
has been already showed, by a continual discharge of that Matter which comes
away, not only exhausts it of that Mucous Liquor, which is a strength and
support to the Parts where a Gleet is situated, but also draws away thereby a
constant supply of those other Juices, wherein the Vigor and Strength of the
Constitution consists: The reason of which is, that near these Parts both of
Men and Women, there are certain Emunctories placed, whose use is to receive
the superfluous Humors or Recrements of the whole Body, and discharge them
through the genital Parts: So that the greater this discharge of Humors is, the
more are the Parts not only weakn'd by it, and the more incessantly and
plentifully do these Humors flow, but also the Nutritious Juices destined to
the nourishment and support of the Neighboring Parts, flows down with it, and
are evacuated. So that at length by reason of this loss of the Nutritious
Juice, which flowing to the same Place, is also corrupted and continually sent
away, not only Weakness and Pains, together with a Pining and Wasting of the
neighboring Parts, but of the whole Body does succeed, from a poor weak and
dispirited Chyle the Blood abounds with. And to this Cause it is, that the
greatest part of Broken and decayed Constitutions are owing. But as I have
treated at large on this Subject of Spoiled and Broken Constitutions by Fast
Living, former ill Cures, Salivations, and Mercury in the 3d Chapter of my
Practical Scheme, to be had GRATIS where this Book is Given away; I shall not
repeat that Subject here, but refer my Reader to it.

The Body therefore being thus emptied and drained of those Nutritious Juices,
which in healthy, hail, sound Persons, are its support: In length of time
excessive Pains and Weakness, especially in the Loins and small of the Back,
ensues; together with a debility and weakness in the Nerves and Joints, Pale,
Faint and livid Looks, especially about the Eyes, Melancholy, loss of Appetite,
decay of Spirits and Strength, a remarkable Wearyness over the whole Body,
swelling in the Legs, and an universal decay of Strength.

So that these Symptoms not stoping in time, (as most Persons in the beginning
deceive themselves they will, fancing a Gleet to be an inconsiderable Thing,
and that it will wear off of it self, in process of Time) they increase, and
are followed also by others, as an almost continual Thirst, a hectical
Disposition, Atrophy, and wasting of Flesh, till at length the Body is so
drained, as to be brought into the highest degree of a Consumption.

All which Symptoms are occasioned by the great loss of the Mucous Liquor of
the Glands, which being thus weakened and relaxed, have their Meatus's or
openings so widened, and loosened, as not be able to restrain the Flux or
dripping away of the Matter, whereby the withering of the whole Body, with a
dryness and Siccity of the Nerves and Nervous Juices must necessarily in a
short time ensue.

As for the effects or ill Consequences of a real Simple Gonorrhaea, they are
no less dismal then speedy; For in a little time, says Dr. Willis, from the
vast Efflux of real seminal Matter, the whole Strength is prostrated, a Tabes
dorsalis presently ensues, and terminates in the Grave.

It remains now to speak a Word or two of the ill effects and consequences of
Weaknesses in Women, as I have already done of Gleets in Men, as I promised
above in the foregoing Chapter. Since therefore what I have already said in
this Chapter, is to be proportionably applied to Women: The Effects of these
Weaknesses are Pains in the small of the Back and Head, want of Appetite, bad
Digestion, Weariness, and Restlessness, sometimes swellings of the Legs, pale
livid Countenance. etc. And as this Evil is mostly occasioned by foregoing
Distempers, (tho also sometimes by sudden Frights, violent Exercise, irregular
Living, etc.) so it weakens the Body also more and more, bringing the whole
human Frame into a pining desperate State, unless cured by proper Remedies
skillfully administered in time, no evil in the World, that usually happens to
Women, being of so very ill consequence to the Looks, Complexion, Mind, Habit,
Strength, and whole Body as this.

Insomuch that if this great Evil (which too often proves the BANE and Ruin of
Woman kind) be not timely remedied, it certainly causes either untimely
Barrenness, or if they have Children, they are weak, infirm, and diseased, and
the Blood and Juices become more and more impoverished, till an inevitable
Consumption, Dropsy and other Distempers, prove only the Forerunners of
immediately ensuing Death.

CHAP. VII How to know when a Gleet, or other such Weakness is free from, or
partakes still of the Relics of a former Venereal Infection. -- Or (which is
the same thing) Signs to know when a Person is properly Well, and the Malignity
carried off, after former Cures, although they may have a Gleet or other such
Weakness still remaining upon them.
THE Design of this Chapter being to show how every Person that has received an
Injury, and been under Cure for it, may know whether the Malignity be wholly
carried off or not: And if there be any Running or Gleeting still remaining
afterward, whether it proceeds from any Secret Infection still lurking behind,
or from Medicines taken for a Cure, or from a natural Weakness of the Parts,
which some Persons from a more then ordinary delicacy and tenderness of
Constitution are liable to, notwithstanding the utmost Care both of themselves,
and the Person under whose Hands they were during their Cure; My Reader is to
take notice, that after a due evacuation and clearing of the Body of the
Venereal Infection, the mattery running which before was Yellowish, Green or
Bloody, looses by Degrees both it is color and quantity, and comes at last to a
perfect Whiteness or Transparency, resembling very much the white of an Egg,
and is Slimy, Mucilaginous, and Ropy; and the Parts are easy and cool: All
which are admirable Signs, and the strongest Presumption that the Malignity is
carried off, and the Person cured and well. But since it frequently also
happens that a Person may be said to be (not ill) cured, although these signs of
a good Cure, may not be altogather so very perfect as here they are described
to be, we must examine this matter still a little farther, for the full
Satisfaction of the most timorous of my Readers.

It has indeed been a common Opinion that in Gleets, when the Matter that comes
away is still discouloured being either yellowish or green, that it is a
certain Sign, (and indeed an only one) of a remaining Infection, and an
imperfect or ill Cure. It Is true, that when the Matter that comes away in a
Gleet, or other such Weakness, is not discouloured at all, but is pure White,
Glutinous and Ropy, and the Parts in all respects entirely cool and easy, there
is no difficulty to pronounce such (...) Person entirely free from Infection,
and (not ill) cured; because if there were any Infection and Malignity still
remaining behind, these signs would not be so perfect a^ here I suppose them to
be: But yet for all this, it is no^ always a certain sign and consequence of
either an actua^^ lurking Infection, or a former ill Cure, when even these
signs are not so very perfect. The reason of this is; that in some Habits of
Body the Owzing Matter which constitutes a Gleet will in some length of time,
and in diseased habits of Body, in its Separation from the Blood be so permixt
with some certain Corrosive (but not at all Venereal) Particles, as thereby to
be so colliquated and altered in it is Texture and Cohesion of it is constituent
Parts, as to appear a sort of Pus, Sanies or Matter something discolored, that
will very much resemble the Relics and Remains of a Venereal Infection, or an
ill Cure: And if a Person should think to change this Color by Purging, one
might, as Dr Harvey observes, Purge a Person's Life away as soon as change
either it is Color, or cause it is entire Abatement. So that the Practitioner
imagining that all yellowish Runnings are malignant (which is a vulgar Error)
goes on still in hopes of changing it, 'till at length the Parts are so
weakened, that the Poor Patient has a Gleet fixed upon him, and thereby rendered
worse instead of better, and perhaps at last told they are incurable.

To show the Truth of this, it is to be observed that the imprudent
Continuation of Venereal Catharticks, rather keeps on the yellowness of the
Running then abates it, by keeping up the humors in a constant Ferment and
Ebullition, and thereby inflaming and frothing them up into a yellow Bilous
Spume or Scum, which is daily separated in the Parts, that are now become as it
were a Cistern, to which Custom has made an open Channel, and converted the
Orifice of the Urethra into (as it were) an Issue, to which the depraved humors
of the Body, and especially of the adjacent Parts flow: And which humors, as
the Blood (even in very well cured Persons) is tinctured with Choler, and
depraved and altered by a long Course of Physic, do also proportionably
partake more or less of a yellowish Color. Hence it plainly appears, that some
Returns of yel^wish small Runnings after some Cures of the Secret sease do not
always indicate any remaining Infection, (...) lay any blame or aspersion upon
the former Cure; ^is yellowness frequently owing it is origin to the yel^ow
Liquors of the Blood. Besides, when the efflux ^f a Gleet is thus continued,
the Glands and Vessels are ^hereby every Day more and more weakened, by which
^he Liquors will be separated more impure and mixed, ^hen they were formerly in
a healthy State, at the same Glands: And therefore it is manifest how Gall
mixing with the Liquor will make it come away of a yellowish Color. This is
not only in Reason possible, but what we find true by daily experience, in
Ulcers and common Sores, from whence a yellowish Matter will flow, owing it is
color purely to the bilous part of the Blood, separated and secerned by the
adjacent Glands. Hence as Dr. Cockburn, takes notice, it frequently happens
that virulent Runnings in Persons who have the Secret Disease actually upon
them have been cured, when the yellowness has continued to the last Drop; which
could not be, if the yellowness were always a part, or mark of the Contagion.

CHAP. VIII. Of the most Rational and True Method of Cure of Gleets, Simple
Gonorrhaeas, and other such Weaknesses in either Sex, proceeding from former
Cures, etc.
AS I have endeavored hitherto demonstratively to deduce the Seat and Nature
of a Gleet, and other such Weaknesses from it is Symptoms, and the Anatomical
Structure of the Part it affects, without engaging in any of the Hypotheses of
the Ancients; so I Will now endeavor to draw such consequences from the Nature
of the Infirmity thus discovered, which will prove the plainest and most
satisfactory Course that can be taken to arrive at the most exact ways of
curing it; especially since the common Methods of Cure of late Years in
Practice, are found from their want of Success not sufficiently grounded on
Reason and Experience. It being a manifest truth, that the best Methods of Cure
are always taken from a Rational Notion of the Nature and Cause of a Disease:
Human Reason being never of greater use in any part of human Life, then it is
in the Practice of Physic. For as Dr. Mead says in the Preface to his Essays
on Poisons, He alone is the most likely Person to Cure any ailment or disorder
in a human Body, who best understands the human Oconomy, the Texture of the
Parts, the Motions of the Fluids, and by consequence the Source and Origin of
the Disorder, according to that of Celsus, Recte Curaturum, quem prima origo
Causae non fefellerit. Having therefore above in the second and following
Chapters, clearly accounted for the most Rational Cause of Gleets, Simple
Gonorrhaeas and other Weaknesses, the subject Matter of this present Treatise:
I hope also as clearly now to show the most Rational Method of their Cure: As
follows:

In omnibus contrarietas Remedio est, is an Aphorism of the great Hippocrates,
and holds good in the Cure of our present Infirmity, as well as in the Cure of
any other particular disorder of the Body whatsoever. Insomuch that if there be
a Heat and Inflammation in any Part, recourse must be had to those things that
are Cooling. In cold Diseases to warm Medicines. If any Humor is sharp and
corrosive, it must be reduced to a due degree of softness by mollifying
Medicines. If any parts are injured, and weakened, strengthening, healing and
Balsamic ones must be made use of before ever a Cure can be effected, in order
to restore the debilitated Parts to their first Tone and Vigor. So that in our
present Infirmity which we have now before us, we find from what has been
hitherto said, the following obstacle, and which must necessarily be removed
before ever we can hope to reinstate the Patient, viz. -- The openings of the
Mucous Glands so often abovementioned in the Urethra being weakened, loosned,
and relaxed by the above mentioned Causes, are thereby become flabby, limber
and loose, which before in a sound State were springy, vigorous and strong; so
that by this means the Ostiola or Mouths of them being deprived of their
natural Power of (in some measure proportionable at least to their bigness,)
contracting and drawing themselves together after every Emission of that Mucous
slimy Liquor they contain, are by consequence always open, by which means this
Liquor is continually owzing out from them and coming away. This being the true
state of our present Question, and the rational Obstacle we have now to
encounter with, as sufficiently appears from what has been above said: It Is
natural to conclude, that the only true and rational Method of Cure of Gleets,
and any other Weaknesses of the same kind whether in Men or Women, must
consist, in one word for all, without any manner of Evasion or going round the
Bush, in affecting the very Place it self from whence the dripping Liquor is
discharged; and this is done by STRENGTHENING these Glands, and thereby
restoring their Openings and Mouths to their former power of contracting, and
constringing themselves after every Emission of the Mucous Liquor they contain;
by which means a certain Bar and Hindrance will be put to their discharging
more of it, then is wisely intended by Nature, as just enough for the
lubrication and moistening of the Passage and no more, and for which end alone
she has designed it. This being once effected, just so much and no more of this
Liquor will afterward proceed from these Glands, as just the defense of the
Urethra requires as a Preservative against the sharpness and saltness of the
Urine as it passes through: it being an established Maxim in Philosophy, That upon
the removal of any Cause, the effect presently ceases. So that wherever the
Cause lies, That must be applied to, before ever we can expect the effects to
cease. But how to bring this about, Hic Labor, hoc Opus est, it is Residence
being in a part which Nature seems particularly to have affected the
concealment.

Hence my Reader may plainly see, that the great difficulty which has now
puzzled so many Ages in the Cure of Gleets and other such sorts of Weaknesses,
is all (from only a few evidently demonstrable Principles above established)
reduceable, to one only single intention of Cure, viz. to Strengthen these
Glands. It Is no wonder then that the Ancients found such difficulty in this
matter, as after all possible endeavors sometimes to leave their Patients at
best only in statu quo; though in rigor this may be very much doubted, it being
pretty certain that neither the continuance of a Gloet, nor any of the common
Methods of its Cure, have been ever as yet found to improve a Constitution, or
to change it, otherwise, then from a strong to a weaker one.

Our next Enquiry then must be, how this Intention of Cure is to be brought
about and effected with the greatest Ease and Security to the Patient, and what
t^ Nature of those Medicines must be that can perform i^ In order to which we
must consider, that since Glee^ procced from the Mucous Glands in the Urethra,
an^ the contiguous Parts being particularly weakened through long Continuance of
the Secret Disease, and its Cure Repeated Self-Abuses etc. the Intention of
Cure mus^ consist in Strengthening and Contracting these relaxe^ Glands and
Parts adjacent, and thereby restore them t^ their former natural State of
Vigor and Soundness, after having been thus injured, and debilitated either by
the Distemper, or its Cure, Reiterated Self-Abuses, o^ other whatsoever Causes.
And for want of such a Method as this it is, that a great many Persons (although,
otherwise perfectly well) come to have seemingly incureable Gleets fixed and
entailed upon them. For which reason it is that a Gleet is always more or less
difficult to Cure, as it is of greater or less Continuance, or is occasioned by
more or less Frequent self Abuses, or a more or less virulent Humor which gave
the preceding Infection; by every one of which causes the Glands are always
more or less stretched, weakened and debilitated

The Method then I here aim at in the Cure of our present Infirmities, is by
such Medicines as are appropriated in a peculiar manner, and by a Singular
Specific quality, Influence, and tendency to the Injured and debilitated
Glands in the Urethra and parts adjacent chiefly above any other Part or Parts
of the Body whatsoever, and thereby not only so to act upon and affect THEM in
particular as to strengthen close and constringe their Mouths and Orifices, but
also to preserve them hereafter in this sound State. So that these Glands being
reestablished by this Method of Cure, their acquired Vigor will enable them to
resist any future ingress of faster supplies of the Matter they separate and
secerne, then is just necessary and no more for the moistening and lubrication
of the Urethra, and so turning them off to be discharged by Nature another way.
So that whilst the Ancients were Trifling with Their long tedious and uncertain
Methods of Cure, Wonders are performed by This. Besides, this Method of Cure
succeeding to the Satisfaction of the Patient, is a strong Confirmation of the
Truth of the Theory above established: Whereas ^n the other hand, most other
Methods formerly prac^isedby the Ancients, either did not succeed at at, or ^f
at any time they did, it was not 'till after a very ^ong while.

From what has been hitherto said, it plainly appears that this our Method of
Cure is not only effectual in Men, but will be found upon Trial to be inferior
to few, for those Weaknesses mentioned above in the 4th Chap. in Women.

I will not here trouble my Readers in proving that in Nature there are some
certain Medicines which being taken into the Stomach, will immediately tend
toward and make their Way to, some one particular part of the Body Electively
and preferably to any other: Having fully cleared that Difficulty in the 8th,
9th, and 10th Chapters of the 3d Edition of My New SYSTEM of the GOUT and
RHEUMATISM, to be had Gratis where this Book is Given away. I desire them
therefore to read those Chapters, wherein I have clearly shown how Medicines by
a particular Specific Quality they are endowed with, will (being taken into
the Stomach) tend to and have an influence over some one peculiar Part of the
Body, which they are designed particularly to relieve, rather then any other,
as is there clearly showed in Medicines appropriated to the Cure of the GOUT.
All which I hope will fully convince any Person of the Possibility of a
Strengthening Restorative Medicine's being taken into the Stomach, and from
thence to tend toward and make it is way (by means of the Bloods Circulation)
immediately to that Part in particular above any other in the Body whatsoever,
which is the true Seat of a Gleet, I mean the Urethra or Urinary Passage. This
Point therefore being fully discussed in those Chapters of the abovementioned
System, I Will say nothing more of that Subject here, but refer my Reader to the
perusal of that Book, which he may have for only Asking for, at the Places
abovementioned where this Book is Given away.

As to the Change of the Color of the Gleet, etc. since it generally proceeds
as above has been said from a mixture of Choler, Bile, Gall, and several
Impurities with the Blood, by consequence to cleanse and Rectify the ill
Crasis of This, will effectually change the ill Color of That. Care therefore
must be taken that al^ Strengthening Medicines that are made use of in the Cure
of Gleets, be also endowed with a certain detergent Faculty, by which they may
in their passage to those Parts they are chiefly designed for, so Cleanse,
Sweeten and Purify the Blood, as at the same time that they Strengthen the
Glands in the Urethra, they may also change the Color of the Liquor these
Glands contain: And by thus changing of it is ill Color, it is Substance if too
thin will also secundario and per accidens be changed at the same time. For
since whenever the Matter Dripping and Owzing away in Gleets and other such
Weaknesses is too thin, it proceeds from its being Colliquated (and if I may
use the Expression as it were in a manner melted down and Liquid) by those
Impurities which are mixed and blended with it out of the Mass of Blood: These
Impurities and Foulnesses being once cleansed out of the Blood, the Mucous
slimy Matter will naturally reassume again its own natural Tenacious and
Glutinous Consistence, as it has in Statu sano.

My Reader perhaps will ask me whether or no this Method of Cure is proper in
all sorts of Gleets and other such Weaknesses. To which I Answer, that when a
Gleet is purely such, and entirely free from any Relics or Remains of former
Infection, the abovementioned Method of Cure is inferior to few in the World.
If therefore the Gleet or other such Weakness be what proceeds from a former
Cured Injury, and that the Person had no manner of such Infirmity upon them
before they received and were Cured of that Injury, it is absolutely necessary
for the Patients safety first of all to be satisfied, that there is no
remaining Malignity attending it, which my Reader will sufficiently be
instructed in from what has been above said in the foregoing Chapter. But if
Persons are any ways doubtful whether or no the Gleet may still Partake of any
Preceding Infection, it will be necessary to clear the Body and by Consequence
the Gleet or any other such Weakness of whatever former Infection it may be
still blended, and mixed with, least instead of Cureing a Person of a Gleet,
something of worse Consequence be fixed and rivetted upon him. What therefore is
most proper for every such doubtfu^ Person to do previous to the Taking of the
following Great Restorative is fully mentioned in the Directions Sealed up
along with it: And which Method will effectually carry of all the Remainder of
any Former Taint or Infection whatsoever out of any Person's Body, in order to
be perfectly and safely Cured of their Gleet by the following Restorative: So
that how effectual so ever any other (usually practiced) Method of Cure of
Gleets, etc. may be, it will scarce prove a more Safe one then This. The Chief
consideration we have of the Goodness of any Method of Cure, is its Efficacy,
Safety, and Time wherein we are Cured by it. All which being, after repeated
Experiments, found to be best Answered by the Method here proposed, then by any
other whatsoever of the Ancients, I presume I shall do no small piece of
Service to that unhappy part of Mankind that labors under these uncomfortable
Infirmities, in publishing it.

Hence it appears that Gleets and other such Weaknesses are not so difficult of
Cure as a great many Persons make them to be, who after all their Endeavors to
rid the Patients of them to no purpose, dismiss them at last with their Opinion
that they will never be cured, assuring them at the same time, it will never hurt
them, and that Nature at length will Wear and throw it off, and the like: Which
a great many give Credit to, in hopes of finding it true, 'till time has made
this Error too manifestly appear, for instead of Natures overcoming it, and
their finding no inconvenience by it, it has grown worse and worse, and proved
at last so very inconvenient, that the poor Patient has born it with no small
Uneasyness.

CHAP. IX. Of a certain Strengthening Restorative Medicine for the Cure of
Gleets and other such Weaknesses.
THE Learned Dr. Cockburn in his Treatise of a Gonorrhaea, 2d Edition, page
210. lays this down for a general Rule in Physic: Viz. That no Medicine is to
be received for its singular Use, 'till it has had many Trials in proper
Circumstances; i. e. 'till it has been used on a Number of People equally ill,
or that it has its Effects, when no reasonable hopes are left of a Cure by the
best of other Medicines Skilfully administered. Hence it is by consequence to be
concluded that when a Medicine has showed its Efficacy in these Circumstances,
it not only may, but even ought to be received by every Person solicitous for
their Health and Welfare.

After therefore having proceeded thus far with this Treatise, I should be
injurious to my Readers thus to explicate the Origin, Cause, Symptoms, Effects,
and ill Consequences, together with the most rational Method of Cure of their
Infirmities, if I should leave them there, perhaps something Wiser then they
were before as to the just now enumerated Heads, but not a bit the nearer to a
Cure. In order then not to entertain them with mere Speculations, I Will
endeavor to give them some Practical Assistance, by proposing here to the
World, a truly Great and Noble Remedy for those Weaknesses and Disorders here
treated of.

The Medicine I propose is a most excellent Balsamic Restorative, which for
Recovering Nature in those many Weaknesses so frequently abovementioned has not
many equals. It being a most Noble Strengthner in all Weaknesses, whether from
Hard Labors, Over-strainings, Wrenches, Miscarriages, Self-Abuses, and other
Secret Injuries and their Cures, in either Sex. Its efficacy also reaches still
farther, being of admirable Use to Cure Pains, Weaknesses, and all Imbecilities
of Nature, either in the Back, Reins, Loins, or elsewhere; to remove or take
away any Stoppage of Urine, by effectually and yet gently (as Nature seems to
defire) carrying off all Mucous, Filthy, Sanious and Infectious Matter Slime or
Gravel lodged in the Reins, and elsewhere by ill Cures or other Causes; and
which either produces a Sharpness in the Urine, or a too frequent Provocation
to make it: And thereby recovers the lost Tone of the Seminal Vessels and
Mucous Glands in the Urethra so often abovementioned. Destroying thereby all
Relics of Venereal Venom that lurking in the Body insensibly wastes and decays
the Flesh and Strength.

And least my Readers should suspect the possibility of the Operation of a
Medicine taken in at the Mouth, and from thence conveyed into the Stomach, on a
Part so remote from it, as that is which I have proved above in the 2d Chap. to
be true, real, and indeed only Seat of a Gleet and other such Weakness: I must
refer them to what I have said on this Subject in the 9th and 10th Chapters of
my abovementioned System of the GOUT and Rheumatism. In which Chapters is as
clearly showed as so Nice and Intricate a Subject will admit from the
Principles of the Modern Philosophy, how it is very possble for a Medicine to be
taken in at the Mouth, and conveyed into the Stomach, and from thence to be
mixed with that Portion of the Mass of Blood which it finds circulating in the
Vessels there, by which means of the Bloods Circulation it is soon carried
about the Body, and by consequence to That very individual part it is designed
to relieve: As is fully proved in those Chapters of the just now mentioned
System, of the Operation of the Anti-Arthritick Medicine there proposed to act
upon even the very utmost and remotest extremities of the Body, viz. Those
Joints which usually the Gout seizes. I desire therefore my Readers, that
since, they may have that System for only Asking for, they will be pleased to
peruse the 9th and 10th Chapters of it, and apply them to this Subject, that I
may not repeat the same Matter here over again. For as a Medicine taken for the
Gout if it be a true and real Anti-Arthritick, never attempts to exert its
principal Force of acting till it arrives along with the Blood, at the Glands
of those very Joints it is designed to relieve; just so the Great Restorative
and Stengthing Medicine I here propose, being taken a few Drops of it, in a
little Wine, Ale, or Beer, is thereby carried down into the Stomach, from
whence it mixes it self (being of a Spirituous Volatile Nature) with the Mass of
Blood, and is carried with it about the Body, and among other Parts, to that
which is the true Seat of those Infirmities here treated of. Being arrived
there by a particular Specific influence it bears over, and Tendency to that
Part above any other, and the Mucous Glands contained in it, it there begins to
exert its force and to operate, by Strengthening, Healing, and Restoring the
Mouths and Ostiola of those little Glands, to their former Elasticity,
Springyness and Vigor, by which means they will naturally again recover that
Power they formerly had of Constringing themselves as naturally they ought to
do after every Emission of the Mucous slimy Liquor they Contain, and which
Nature has wisely designed for the Lubrication of the Passage, as has
sufficiently been above explicated. This being once performed by this Great
Restorative Medicine, and the Mouths of these Glands being recovered from their
looseness and flabbyness, to an Elastick Springy State, by consequence a Bar
will thereby be put for the future, by which just so much and no more of this
Mucous slimy Liquor will be let out and come away, then just the Moistening and
Lu brication of the Passage in a hail sound state requires: By which means, a
Gleet which perhaps for a long time has afflicted the Patient will be taken
away, and the Parts restored to their former due state of Health and Strength.

The property of this great Restorative is not only Traumatick, i. e. only to
Heal and thereby to strengthen the Mucous Glands in the Passage and the
Womb-Vessels, by gently straitening them, and reducing them to their natural
Tone, but also to deterge and cleanse them of whatever Filth they may by their
Weakness have contracted, never disordering the Body, but keeping it in a due
State. It Is not unpleasant to take, and being once received in a proper Vehicle
as a Glass of Wine, Ale, Beer, etc. into the Stomach, it (by means of the
Bloods Circulation) displays its Virtues after a wonderful manner, effectually
answering the intentions of Cure. Besides all which it is a very great purifier
and sweetner of the Blood and Juices, and thereby invigorates, enlivens, and
strengthens the whole Body, taking away Weaknesses, and Pains in the Back,
Loins, and elsewhere, rendering the Person brisk, lively, healthy, and strong,
and puts an end to those troublesome Companions commonly called Gleets, and
other such Weaknesses.

So that to a Person even never so well in Health that should take of it, it
will cleanse, sweeten, and purify the Blood, and thereby wonderfully enliven,
animate, strengthen, and invigorate the whole Constitution, but above all in a
more particular manner then ordinary those Parts which being hidden in the Body
are too remote for any Manual Operation to act upon, as the Seminal and Urinary
Vessels, the Prostatae, Parastatae, and Mucous Glands in the Urethra. This
Noble Medicine being to be taken by Drops may be carried in the Pocket, and
taken as well abroad as at home, without any manner of uneasiness, trouble,
suspicion, or confinement, for Example at the Tavern, Coffee-House, or any
other Public Place, by which means Gentlemen and others will be Cured in a
manner insensibly and before they are almost aware of it. Its Operation is
principally by Urine, but nevertheless it will in most Constitutions so assist
Nature as to promote the having one Stool in about 24 Hours. Nothing does
exceed this admirable Remedy in the abovementioned Cases, where either too much
Purging has over relaxed and weakened the Tone of the Parts, or too free a use
of Mercury, and other Pernicious methods of Cure have been made Use of,
restoring the Body to a due State of health and Strength.

This Great Restorative in fine neat Bottles is Sealed up (with the Print of
the Anodyne NECKLACE which the late Dr. Paul Chamberlen in his life time
Recommended for Childrens TEETH so often abovementioned, to distinguish it from
any COUNTERFEIT) together with Printed Directions in English and French for its
Use, so clear, easy, full, and plain that Persons may Cure themselves with it
in any remote Country, Season, Climate, or Part of the World, (for if well
Corked it will not grow worse with keeping) Price a Guinea. And is to be had at
the Places mentioned above in the Title Page of this Book.

APPENDIX.
HAving above in the Title Page of this Book made mention of a Certain Anodyne
NECKLAGE Recommended by the late Dr. Paul Chamberlen for the Easy Breeding and
Cutting of Children's Teeth, etc. I Will here subjoin Two Testimonies published
by Dr. Chamberlen in favor of this Soverain Necklace, and the Specific Remedy
and Elixir, mentioned in the Practical Scheme, in Opposition to some
Counterfeits a broad in the World.

WHereas a NECKLACE has been Published under Pretense that it is the same with
that which is Recommended by me (tho nothing at all LIKE it.) I hereby declare
to the World, that I know nothing of it, nor its Author, who pretends to Decry,
what nevertheless he tries to Counterfeit. I do not deny but that I have for
some time, and do still Approve of and Recommend to the World that most
Admirable NECKLACE for Childrens Teeth, etc. As also, The Specific Romedy and
Elixir for the Secret Disease and Broken Constitutions, Sold up one Pair of
Stairs, at the Sign of this Nocklace without Temple Bar, etc. All which I know
(from my Experience of them) to be most Excellent Things, and worth any one's
having in those Circumstances. For which Reason I Recommend to every ones
serious Perusal, That most Excellent little Practical Scheme and Essay which
the Ingenious Author has writ upon them, and gives away Gratis in most European
languages. But if any other Necklace besides this (which is the ONLY one that I
Recommend, and is a very valuable Secret,) As also, if any other Specific
Remedy or Elixir for these Distempers, are at any time under my Name Published
by Persons who live by Pyrating and Counterfeiting other Men's Secrets, it is a
manifest Imposition upon me and the Public. Therefore I hereby Caution all
Persons to be ware of such Counterfeits.

From my House in Great Suffolk-street, near the Hay-Market, Mar. 22. 1717.
Paul Chamberlen, M. D.


THE SPECIFIC REMEDY: ELIXIR: And NECKLACE for Childrens TEETH, at the Sign of
this Necklace without Temple Bar, etc. I Approve of and Recommend. All others I
disown as Spurious and Counterfeit.

From my House in Great Suffolk-Street, Apr. 18. 1717. Paul Chamberlen, M. D.


The CONTENTS.
THE Preface. Page 2. Chap. 1. Some few Anatomical Observations necessary to be
taken Notice of, in order to a right knowledge of the true Cause, Seat, and
Nature of Gleets, and other such Weaknesses. p. 4. Chap. 2. How the Weak and
Flaccid State abovementioned of the Mucous Glands, and their Orifices or Mouths
in the Urethra, are the true Cause of Gleets. p. 9. Chap. 3. Of Self-Abuses,
etc. p. 13. Chap. 4. Of a Simple Gonorrhaea, whence it proceeds, and how it
differs from a Common Gleet. p. 19. Chap. 5. Of Weaknesses in Women. p. 21.
Chap. 6. Of the ill Consequences and Effects of Gleets and other such
Weaknesses. p. 24. Chap. 7. How to know when a Gleet or other such Weakness is
free from, or partakes still of a former Venereal Infection. Or (which is the
same thing) Signs to know when a Person is properly well, and the Malignity
carried off, after former Cures, although they may have a Gleet, or other such
Weakness still remaining upon them, p. 27 Chap. 8. Of the most Rational and
True Method of Cure of Gleets, Simple Gonorrheas, and other such Weaknesses in
either Sex, proceeding from former Cures, etc. p. 29 Chap. 9. Of a certain
Strengthening Restorative Medicine for the Cure of Gleets, and other such
Weaknesses, p. 35 Appendix. Containing two particular Testimonies of the late
Dr. Paul Chamberlen in Favor of the Specific Remedy, Elixir, Necklace, etc.
p. 39
ADVERTISEMENT.
IF any Gentlemen, Traders, Merchants, Captains, or Mates of Ships,
Sea-Surgeons or others trading Abroad to the East or West Indies, Turkey,
Africa, The South Sea, or elsewhere will take either of The SPECIFIC REMEDY or
ELIXIR mentioned in The Practical Scheme: Or of the Sovereign ANODYNE
NECKLACES, Recommended by the late Dr. Paul Chamberlen for the Easy Breeding
and Cutting of Childrens TEETH; and mentioned in the Essay writ upon them: Or
if the Anti-Arthritick Tincture mentioned in the System of the GOUT and
RHEUMATISM, Or of the Great Restorative, mentioned in this Treatise of Gleets,
all which now Sell, and have done for these several Years past extraordinary
well, not only here in London, where the Call for them increases every Day, but
also Abroad, being in great Esteem and Reputation not only throughout both
Parts of Great Britain, Ireland, and most of our Plantations, (great quantities
having of late been exported by Merchants, Captains of Ships, Sea-Surgeons, and
others) But also are now very much esteemed in France, Holland, Germany, and
several other Countries and Courts of Europe, being continually sent for
thither to the entire Satisfaction of all that use 'em: They shall have room
for very large Profit at the Sign of the Anodyne NECKLACE for Children's TEETH
without Temple Bar abovementioned. For which Reason the Author, being willing
to encourage the Exportation of 'em for the general Good of Mankind (which
hitherto has incontestably appeared to be so, from the many Certificates of
their success from several Parts, incerted from time to time in the Public
Prints: and the general consent of all who use 'em of both Sexes) for that End,
has now published This Scheme not only in English and French but also an
Abstract and Epitome of it, in most other European Languages, for the Use and
Benefit of all European Foreigners; but especially Merchants and others Trading
to France: Germany: Holland: Spain: Italy: Portugal: Sweden: Denmark: Poland:
Muscovy: Turkey, etc. They having obtained Reputation now in several of these
Countries.

Here therefore I Will take occasion to acquaint my Reader, that a great many
Practitioners in Physic, but especially Sea-Surgeons, have of late (after
having made several repeated successful Trials upon their Patients HERE IN
LONDON) had over and over again great quantities with very great Allowance by
Wholesale of these Remedies at the Sign of the NECKLACE abovementioned, to
carry with them to Sea, they all now finding it their Interest and indeed their
cheapest way to buy these Remedies to cure their own Patients with. As the
Gentleman (the Sea-Surgeon) was pleased to say, who some time ago by Dr.
Chamberlen', express Advice took along with him over-Sea a large Quantity of
them. Also another Gentleman, owned in his Letter incerted in the Practical
Scheme, p. 35. that out of 23 Persons that took of the Specific Remedy, only
One missed of his Cure, and that the Person confessed was by his own
Mismanagement. So that of late Years it has been a common Practice of several
Surgeons, and other Practitioners in Physic to buy these Romedies to cure
their own Patients with. By which they have gained both Money and Reputation.
See more of the Allowance by WHOLESALE in my SYSTEM of the GOUT and RHEUMATISM
and Philosophical Essay upon the Anodyne Necklace. Given gratis where this Book
is given away.

So that now seldom or never a Week passes but some Surgeon or other, more
especially of those belonging to the Sea, Buys of those Remedies, and of the
Anodyne NECKLACES for Children's TEETH by Wholesale, at the Sign of this
Necklace without Temple Bar, where ^ery large Profit is given. But of these
Necklaces I de^^re my Reader to peruse a particular Treatise by it self,
Entitled, A Philosophical Essay upon this Necklace, etc. Given Gratis at those
Places where this Book is given away.

I desire my Reader to give me leave to trouble him him here with an Account of
a particular Cure of the GOUT, performed by the Anti-Arthritick Tincture
mentioned in the New System of the Gout and Rheumatism, and of some few other
Cures, of other Ailments and Disorders.

The following Certificate was sent (entirely unknown to the Author) to London
enclosed in a Letter to Mr. Pinckard Attorney at Law, over the Water-Stairs in
Durham-Yard in the Strand, part of which Letter is as follows.

Dear Son, Histon, Jan. 8. 1718.
THis is to acquaint you, how I have been attacked, and how wonderfully also I
have been relieved by the Tincture for the GOUT, which you sent me last Spring.
I desire This Testimony which I here send you, may be Published, and I will
Testify the Truth of it to all Persons enquiring of me about it, as I desire
also the same of you to do, etc.


I Robert Needham the Elder, of Hilston near Monmouth, Gent. having been above
33 Years afflicted with the GOUT, and many of those Years I had it in my
Shoulders, Elbows Hands, Knees and Feet, and this frequently altogether at one
and the same time; and thereby obliged for near six Weeks together at a time to
lie both Night and Day in my Clothes, and my Stomach paul'd, and my self
reduced to the utmost Weakness. I abovementioned, do for the Benefit of others,
hereby Certify that some time ago I was violently seized in both my Feet with
the GOUT, expecting the same or worse Treatment I usually had, but then and for
some small Time after I continuing to take of the Remedy prepared for this End
by the Author of the New System of the GOUT and Rheumatism, having sent for it
from London, to have in readiness by me; through God Almighty's Blessing, in
three Days time it carried off all Pain, preserved my Stomach very well, and
kept my Body very easy, and in such good Temper, that I could walk about my
House, and do now walk abroad without a Cane or Staff, which for most part of 6
Months past I could not do, having frequently Pains in my Ancles and Feet, of
which I am now entirely freed.

Witness my Hand this 30 th of December 1717. Robert Needham.


HAving been extreme ill with wandering Pains, and broken Constitution, etc. so
very bad, and was so weak and worn away, that all my Friends were of Opinion
that I was in a Consumption. I applied my self to several Physicians, but to no
Effect, till I bought that famous Specific Elixir for Broken Constitutions,
mentioned in the Practical Scheme, which has perfectly Cured me, so that I am
as well as ever I was in my Life, and publish this, that others laboring under
the same Misfortune may happily find Relief, as I have done, as I am ready to
satisfy any Person that will call upon me at my House, Brace's Coffee-House in
Silver-street near Woodstreet.

Nov. 20. 1717. William Smith.


A Young Lady having had (from her Infancy) the Evil so broke out in great
Holes in her Body, that for 26 Years she could never go alone or stir out of
her Chamber without help, being indeed a most miserable Object, continually
weeping whole Days and Nights scarce having one easy Hour, her Life being a
perpetual Torment to her. Fifty Guineas were offered to Dr. Brigs in
Bloomsbury, if he could Cure her: Dr. Chamberlen, Dr. Mead, Dr. West, and
several other eminent Physicians, Mr. Giffard, Mr. Tocket, and several other
Skilful Surgeons were all Eyewitnesses of this her Condition, being given over
by all as incurable, and indeed she utterly despaired of ever being Cured; at
last Dr. Chamberlen advised her to take of the Specific Remedy: she only took
a few times of it, by which the Holes and Sores, which for 26 Years had drained
her Body to a perfect Skeleton, are now healed up; she is brisk and well, and
can go up and down Stairs, and abroad alone, which she could never do in her
Life before, and blesses the happy Day that even Dr Chamberlen advised her to
it. The Lady her self is willing to see and satisfy any Person about it, at the
Green Door in Water-street, behind Arundal-street in the Strand.


A Young Gentleman 3 Years ago, got the Secret Disease in a violent manner, and
soon after the Injury received applied himself to a certain eminent and noted
Surgeon (for his Practice in Venereal Cures) in London, who Salivated him, but
did not Cure him. After which he took a Certain Remedy Sold in Town, which is a
COUNTERFEIT of This Specific Remedy, but as it was a Counterfeit of this true
Remedy, it proved to no more purpose then his Salivation, but he grew worse
after it, being Ulcerated, and in a very deplorable Condition, insomuch that he
was thought by all his Friends past Cure. But in November 1717 by taking of
this famous Specific Remedy, he was perfectly Cured, as I will fully satisfy
any Person, who will be pleased to enquire for Mr. Peter Riscorla at my House
the Green Ball in Cow-cross near West-Smithfield. Where for the Good of the
Public, or any that labor under the like Misfortune, the Gentleman will be
seen, and give an Account himself of the truth of this.


HAving had the King's Evil for 30 Years past to such a degree, that the
continual Running of the many Sores and Blotches of the Distemper had drained
my Body almost to a Skeleton, insomuch that I was brought so low that for some
Years past I have been entirely confined at home. I used all Means the Hospital
and several Physicians could prescribe, but to no manner of purpose. At last
hearing of the many Cures performed by the famous Specific Remedy belonging to
the Practical Scheme, recommended by the late Dr. Paul Chamberlen, I went in a
Coach to the Sign of the Anodyne Necklace for Childrens TEETH without
Temple Bar, to fetch the Remedy not being able to go a Foot, having been
confined at home for several Years, and having taken now of this Wonderful
Remedy most of my Blotches, Holes, and Sores, are finely healed up, and I am so
well recovered, that I have gone a foot through the City, to the Astonishment of
all who knew me. Of the Truth of which, I will satisfy any Person at my House.
-- Geo. Wadk^ns, Barber and Perewig-maker at the Blew Boar in White-Chappel. --
Dec. 17. 1717.


FRom a Distemper of 16 Years standing; the Result of which were Scabs and
Nodes in my Body, as big as Nuts; Blotches and Sores from Head to Foot, and
some of them in my Legs, large enough to lay an Egg in; my Body so weak, and my
Flesh so rotten, that upon my stretching it, it would rend asunder, as tho cut
with a Knife. I William Forbush, Cap-maker over against Queen Elizabeth's-Head
in Church-Lane, near White-chappel, am now relieved and made whole by God
Almighty's Blessing on the Specific Remedy and Elixir, mentioned the Practical
Scheme of the Secret Disease and Broken Constitutions. The Amazement of all my
Friends at my Cure, when declared Incurable by many Physicians, will, no doubt,
raise the Curiosity of several to see me, to whom I shall, with incredible
Pleasure, declare the Fact more at large, with many surprising Particulars.

April 3. 1718. William Forbush.


TO all Persons afflicted and LAID UP with the GOUT I hereby testify that
having had a confirmed GOUT these 9 Years past to such a Degree that I was an
entire Cripple, and not able to go without Crutches, having lost almost the
total use of my Limbs by it. I took all things I could hear of, but to no
purpose, till I took of that most excellent Anti-Arthritick Remedy belonging to
the New System of the Gout and Rheumatism, by which I am to a Miracle
recovered, cured, and restored to the perfect use of my Limbs, being as able to
go without my Crutches as ever I could in my Life, which before I happily took
of this Remedy, I could never do. Of the Truth of which I will satisfy any
Person. -- Tho. Wiggins, Printer at the Black Bull in Oster-Laue, near
West-Smithfield. Dec. 17. 1717.


I James Davis, at his Majesty's Printing House in Black-Fryars, was about 7
Years ago seized with a violent Fever, which settling first in my Feet, and
then flying into my Head, and all over my Body, attended with a prodigious
Swelling and Inflammation, made me incapable of getting out of my Bed for
several Months, and so has continued ever since, excepting some small
Intervals. I had the Advice of several eminent Physicians and Surgeons, as Dr
Cade, Dr Mills, Dr Levet, and others, who were all Eyewitnesses of this my
unhappy Condition, and who by the various Removings of my Distemper, knew not
what to call it, yet ordered me Medicines, but to no purpose: About 3 Years ago
I went to St. Bartholomew's Hospital, and was an Out-Patient several Months,
where the Physicians told me it was a violent GOUT, but could have no Ease.
Having thus had the Advice of the Learned without Success, I began to hearken
to every Bodies Instructions, sending for and taking all the Medicines I could
hear of. And as the Expense was large, so was their Number I think innumerable,
which only added to my Misfortune, not hearing of any Person so violently
afflicted as my self. Being in this miserable Condition, and given over by all
as Incurable, the GOUT still increasing so violently, that my Joints became so
KNOTTED, that I was rendered quite unable to follow my Business, and destitute
of all Relief; some Time ago, I was recommended by a Gentleman to the
Anti-Arthritick Tincture mentioned in a New System of the Gout and Rheumatism
given away Gratis, etc. I had not taken above a Doses before I found a great
Alteration. The GOUT which was then in my Stomach, abated, and by some
continuance of the Remedy I still grew sensibly better every Day; so that I am
now free from all Pain and Stiffness in my Joints, and as well in Health and
Strength as ever I was in my Life. This Benefit I have received by God's
Blessing, and that inestimable Remedy being so very great I desire this may be
published for the Good of others. The Truth of which I am ready to testify,
living in Printing-House-Street in Black-Fryars.

October. 6. 1717. James Davis.


I could reckon up great numbers more of other such undeniable Testimonies of
Cures by these Remedies, on Persons even given over by all others: But having
trespassed on my Readers Patience too long already, I Will make an end, desiring
Him to peruse the several News Papers of these 5 years last past wherein he
will find great numbers of Authentic Certificates of surprising Cures wrought
by them. For to recite the particular Cases of every one that has happily
experienced the good effects of this Specific Remedy and Elixir, only since
March 1713, that the 1st Edition of this Book was published, would swell this
little Treatise far beyond my present design: Therefore I Will leave every one to
the perusal of the News Papers, and then to be informed of the Persons
themselves as to their Success. All which are as sufficient as even 10000 more
would be to convince any Person of the great virtue and efficacy of these
Remedies. Persons indeed may go from place to place to seek a Cure, but when
they have sought and tried all they can, they will scarce find a Better nor
Surer then by these Remedies, as any Person who trys them will to their Comfort
find.

ADVERTISEMENT. Given Gratis the Four following Books, viz.
1st. THE 25th Edition in English and French (and also Abridged in most other
European Languages) Dedicated to Dr. Chamberlen, of The Practical Scheme of
Secret Injuries and Broken Constitutions, by Fast Living. Former ill Cures,
Salivations, and Mercury. Published ever since March 1713.

2ly. The New System of the GOUT and Rheumatism, drawn from Reason, Anatomical
Observations, and Experience.

3ly. A Rational Account of the true Seat, Cause, Nature, and Cure of Gleets,
and other such WEAKNESSES, usually attending Persons after former Cures,
Self-abuses, etc.

4thly. The Philosophical Essay, Dedicated to the Royal Society upon the
Celebrated Anodyne NECK LACE, Recommended by the late Dr. Paul Chamberlen for
Children's TEETH, etc. Pr. 5 s. -- Published by reason of the great increase of
late Years in the Bills of Mortality, by which it appears that in and about
London (the same may be said of Paris, or any other great City) generally
speaking near upon 12000 Children have Yearly died of their Teeth, and
Convulsions and Fevers caused thereby, before this Admirable Physical Necklace
was published in the World. Besides the great Numbers of Women that are daily
lost in Childbed: And the Multitudes of Persons that die of Distempers of the
Head. -- Whereas since this Necklace has been published, the Bills of Mortality
have so decreased as to be less than ever they have been known to be before:
More Children dying of their Teeth, then of all other Distempers put together
whatsoever. -- So that indeed no Family ought to be without one of these
NECKLACES: for the great Numbers of Children who of late Years have Worn it,
have not only Bred, and Cut their Teeth easily, and all the while thrived
extremely, but even Multitudes have been retrieved by it from the Jaws of Death
in a Nights time, after all hopes were past to the Astonishment of all People:
The Property of this most Excellent Necklace being to take off Fevers, Fits,
Convulsions, Loosnesses, etc. beyond Expectation.

These 4 Books (all by the Author of The Practical Scheme) are given gratis. At
the following Places, viz.

Up one Pair of Stairs between the Rose Tavern and Pamphlet-Shop at the Sign of
this NECKLACE without Temple Bar.

At Mrs Garways at the R. Exchange-Gate next Cornhil.

At Mr Coopers the Corner of Charles Court in the Strand.

At the Unicron an Apothecary's Shop, on St. Margaret's Hill in the Borough,
Southwark.

And (for the convenience of Sea-saring persons) at the Indian Handkercher
facing the New Stairs in Wapping.

FINIS.

