APPEARANCE IS AGAINST THEM, IN A SERIES OF LETTERS, IN THREE VOLUMES, BY THE
AUTHOR OF EMILY HERBERT, OR PERFIDY PUNISHED.

VOL I.

LONDON: Printed for THOMAS JONES, at his Circulating Library, Bridge-Street,
Westminster.

M. DCC. LXXXVI.

(Just Published) EMILY HERBERT, OR PERFIDY PUNISHED.

THREE VOLS. PRICE ^s. 6d.

APPEARANCE IS AGAINST THEM.
LETTER the First.
Miss ROCHLEY, TO Miss LENOX.
Warwick.
WHY all this distress my kind Harriot, why so much anxiety on your Isabella's
account? I hoped my last would have convinced you I am by no means so unhappy,
as your fears would persuade you; no doubt we have suffered, severely suffered:
the unexpected change in our situation is certainly a very mortifying
circumstance; but, remember my dear, we are not the first, would to heaven we
might be the last, who have been ruined by that destructive vice; 'twas my poor
father's only foible; do not then let us be too severe on his memory; nor are
we Harriot left quite destitute as you suppose, far from it: my Orlando's
commission is alone sufficient to maintain him as a gentleman, had he no more,
but he has more -- after paying all my father's debts, and sorry, sorry, am I
to say, they were mostly what is falsely called debts of honor; we find a
reversion of near two thousand pounds. What is this, you will perhaps ask, when
compared to the noble estate he has lost at the gaming table? -- nothing -- yet
Harriot, how many, no less worthy than ourselves are there at this moment, who
would look upon even our present situation as enviable; it is by reflections of
this nature I endeavor to reconcile myself to my fate, and, thank heaven, I am
reconciled to it. -- O spare then, my dear Harriot yours on the memory of my
unfortunate father. I know they are the effects of your tender affection to me;
but they hurt my feelings, I can pity, I can lament his situation; this I can
allow you to do; but, indeed you must spare your censures on a conduct, which,
though faulty, a daughter ought not to condemn: alas, he suffered most severely
-- his agony -- his remorse in his last moments would have pierced the most
flinty heart. -- Orlando's behavior -- but no words can do it justice -- 'twas
great -- 'twas noble -- not a murmur -- not even a sigh escaped him for his own
fate, all his feelings were for the sufferings of a father whose failings he
pitied, and wished to forget -- he, Harriot, has indeed, a degree of manly
fortitude, to which your poor Isabella has no pretensions: my resignation
proceeds rather from an indifference for the superfluities of life, from a
happy flow of spirits, which has ever led me to look on the bright side of the
picture, and let me add, which should indeed have been first mentioned, a firm
persuasion, that, the Almighty never wholly forsakes the virtuous, nor lays
heavier burdens on any of his creatures, than they are able to bear. What have
I then to fear? -- poverty -- be it so, far be it from me to believe all who
are destitute of riches are miserable -- nor can I be deemed absolutely poor,
having such a brother as my Orlando -- he may -- nay, he must rise in his
profession, if merit can entitle him to it; and though that does not always
follow, yet a very superior degree of it, is seldom wholly overlooked, and such
is his -- have I not a kind affectionate friend too in my Harriot, who, I am
positively certain will love me more truly now, if possible, than in my days of
prosperity? -- adversity is justly said to be the test of friendship; I am
under no apprehensions for the loss of yours -- those who may now look cool
upon me, I have pride enough to despise, and thus we are quits -- it will show
me their real value, and that, let me tell you, is gaining no inconsiderable
knowledge. -- Are you convinced my dear Harriot, that I am not so much to be
pitied as you have hitherto kindly feared? believe me, happiness is an
imaginary blessing, at least, it is in the mind we must seek for it, not in
those outward trappings, which wealth bestows, and can only bestow. I am very
much persuaded, I shall find myself as thoroughly satisfied and content, nay,
as vain of my charms too, in a neat linen or muslin gown, as ever I was when
adorned with more costly attire; indeed, I have somewhere read, that beauty
when unadorned, is adorned the most -- it is a doctrine I am now determined to
adopt, and, who knows, what may yet happen; if that maxim may be depended on,
my days of conquest are yet to begin, that is to say, I am to be more capable
of it than ever. -- I feared, you see, you should fancy I had lived to nearly
my nineteenth year, without having done any execution, and, humbled as I am,
felt my pride alarmed at such an idea -- thank heaven, however, I am setting
out in my new plan of life, with my heart perfectly at ease -- no small
consolation that, let me tell you -- not so, my darling Orlando; and that pains
it indeed, more than any other wound it could have received -- he has now, I
fear, a hopeless passion to struggle with, beside all his other misfortunes --
you are no stranger to his atachment to the lovely Caroline, nor her wretch of
a brother's rooted aversion to mine -- an aversion, founded on his superiority;
they were fellow collegians -- he there conceived that envy for his superior
talents; and the universal esteem he met with from every creature, (himself
excepted,) and by some other trifling circumstances which has since occurred,
of which you have seen many proofs; it has, from that period, been his constant
endeavor to do him every injury in his power, though, till now, he has met
with few or no opportunities -- and, there is nothing more certain, I firmly
believe, than that.

Forgiveness to the injured does belong,
They never pardon, who have done the wrong.
Now, I say, he has it amply in his power, to mortify the amiable object of his
aversion, since Caroline is, till of age, wholly in his power, then indeed she
may choose for herself; and I have every reason to believe her choice is already
made, but till then, she cannot marry without the wretch's consent; this
however, is not the worst; time would of course remove this obstacle, but the
scene is changed -- my Orlando's sentiments are of a nature so delicate, that I
am fully persuaded he will, or rather has, from the moment, he knew he had no
longer a fortune to offer, worthy her accceptance, given up every hope of
possessing the mistress of his tenderest affections. Sir John will therefore be
again disappointed, in his hopes of mortifying him, for never will he put it in
any woman's power, to suspect interest could have any influence over him. The
lovely Caroline, I well know, would rejoice in thus having it in her power, to
restore the man of her heart, to that affluence from which he has so unhappily
fallen, indeed, I can hardly form an idea of a greater gratification than that
must be to a noble mind, except being able, like Orlando, thus to sacrifice all
his prospects of felicity to his ideas of honor -- it is the pangs, which I am
sensible, at this moment, wrings his generous heart, that pains mine most, in
this our fallen state -- all other ills I can look forward to with tolerable
fortitude; but where my brother's peace of mind is concerned, I feel most
severely; it is only while reflections on this subject occur, that my heroism
forsakes me; it is then, I mourn our loss, and the little probability there is
of his ever being so happy as he justly deserves to be, or as my affectionate
heart could wish -- for, alas, we may truly be styled orphans. Since, I know
not one relation we have in the world, on whom we have any possible claim: my
poor father, had no brothers -- my amiable and ever to be lamented mother had
but one, and he died when Orlando and I were infants, at least we have every
reason to believe so, as we have never heard of him since. -- On Providence,
Harriot we must place our trust -- but had we hundreds of relations, are there
any on whom we could, or ought with so much confidence to rely? surely there
are not, for they, though possessed of millions, might behold our wants with an
eye of indifference; all our hopes of sharing their wealth might possibly be
disappointed, for it is not those who possess most, who are always readiest to
bestow -- but, in putting our trust in Providence, we not only do our duty, but
cannot fail in being rewarded, either in this world or a better -- yet, alas,
my dear Harriot, this, I fear, is in general, a last resource -- certain it is,
your poor Isabella has no other; I fear, if I had, you might not have found me
capable of making so many pious reflections. -- I dare not too minutely enter
into the scrutiny, conscious, that it is much easier to preach than practice --
of this, however, I am absolutely certain, that the sentiments I have
expressed, are such, as I ought most firmly to believe, and though my faith may
be weak, I trust it will never wholly fail -- do not be shocked my dear
Harriot, when I inform you where to address your next letter, forget, as I
endeavor to do, the elegant mansion, in which I formerly enjoyed the pleasure
of your correspondence, reflect only, that your pleasing epistles will now be
doubly dear to me, robbed as I am, of so many other sources of satisfaction, --
do not suffer a tear to drop on it in remembrance of the past, it is fruitless,
a thousand things may yet happen to cheer my present prospects. I do not
despair; and why, my good girl, should you: Let me find in your next your usual
vivacity, that will help to restore mine, indeed, for my Orlando's sake, I will
do my utmost, not only to appear, but really to be cheerful; not for worlds,
would I give him one moments uneasiness, nay, in this, and only this case,
would I deceive him; and, if possible, persuade him, I am more resigned, than
it is in nature to be -- you have not, I am sure, forgot our worthy teacher at
Mrs. Mason's; she was ever extremely partial, both to you and your Isabella;
our governess, was of a more haughty, more forbidding cast; of course, Mrs.
Bellmour was our favorite -- to what can all this possibly tend, cries, my
Harriot; what has Mrs. Bellmour to do with the address you was talking of? -- a
great deal my dear -- she has lately left our school, and has now a house in
London, where she has half a dozen young women constantly employed in
embroidery, and other elegant works; she has a very numerous acquaintance
amongst people of fashion, and I hear, has great business in that line; her
house is an excecding good one, in an airy situation -- no shop -- pray let
that console you -- with her I have determined to reside for a time -- my pride
forbad my continuing in the country; I dreaded the pity of my former
acquaintance, and trust I shall never require it; as it is one of the least
pleasing of all consolations, and for that reason, I fear, given so freely. --
In town, I can live as retired as I please, and what is still better, enjoy my
Orlando's society daily -- he is now my only protector; could I then do better
than take up my residence near him. -- Mrs. Belmour is a woman of family, of a
fine understanding, well bred, and accomplished; our situations are in some
degree similar -- true there is this difference; she, though as I said, of a
good family, never had hopes of a fortune: Her father was a younger brother --
married against the consent of his friends; was never pardoned, and died when
she was an infant; she was of course brought up without higher views than she
has attained to; perhaps, her father's misfortunes might deter her from
entering into the state of matrimony; be that as it will, she never did, though
she has certainly been a fine woman in her day -- with her, I doubt not I shall
find myself very commodiously situated; my faithful Fanny, begged to continue
with me, indeed, I had no thoughts of parting from her; but, when she saw all
the other servants dismissed, she feared it was to be her fate also; she is a
good creature, and, I believe sincerely attached to me, indeed, having lived in
our family, from a girl I can hardly doubt it -- nor is this desire a small
proof of it. -- My dear Orlando wished me much, also to retain my own man --
but this I at once declared I would not consent to -- could I possibly think of
putting him to an expense for a gratification I could so easily dispense with
-- no, Harriot -- far, far, rather would I make shift with the bare necessaries
of life, than encroach on his generosity -- it is for his dear sake too, I choose
to live retired; in London, I am an absolute stranger; I mean to continue so.
-- Reading, music, drawing, and needle work, with sometimes his loved company,
will abundantly amuse me; thank heaven, my mind is not such a blank as that I
should, like too many others of my sex, be compelled to kill time, instead of
using it to rational purposes: Lord help those insignificant souls, who find
every moment of it heavy, when not engaged in dissipation -- much indeed are
they to be pitied, and many, many such there are, in this small town. -- it is
now I think full time to bid you adieu; when I am settled in my new habitation,
you shall hear from me again -- in the mean time, be under no apprehensions for
me. I have made up my mind. All will do mighty well. Continue to love me, and
believe me,

Ever your affectionate, ISABELLA ROCHLEY.

LETTER the Second.
Same to the Same.
London.
HERE I am, my dearest Harriot, and I assure you, very comfortably settled --
comfortably, you cry, shocked at the homely phrase -- but why shocked? -- you
have been so long accustomed to think of your Isabella, as enjoying every
elegance, every luxury of life, that the idea of being reduced to the mere
comfortable, it appears, I suppose, a mighty uncomfortable expression -- now,
I, on the contrary, by casting my eyes around me, and viewing the thousands who
every moment pass my windows, visibly destitute of even that blessing, think
it is no small mercy, considering, that another unlucky cast of the dice, might
have put me on a level with the most wretched -- it is by reflecting in this
manner, my dear Harriot, one finds consolation; in fact, I have lost nothing
essentially necessary to happiness, were it not a truth, how very very few, in
this world have any pretensions to it -- few I mean, in comparison of those,
who are even in a far worse situation than I am at this moment; have I not a
kind affectionate brother, a friend, no less tenderly attached to me? -- in
short, I am determined to bid defiance to adversity; I will bear it, not only
with resignation, but, if possible, cheerfully, which I am positively certain,
will strip it of half its horrors; no more condolence then, no more fruitless
repining, let us remember, this misfortune was brought upon us by a father, a
kind, an indulgent, though an imprudent one; be his faults and failings forgot,
and, may I ever reflect with gratitude, on the thousand benefits we have
received from him -- a good education, well informed understanding, sentiments
we need not blush to acknowledge; these, Harriot, we owe to his paternal care,
but for those instructions, I might not have been able, as thank Heaven, I now
can, to look back without a sigh, to those ample possessions, once ours -- now
in the possession of others, perhaps, less deserving -- why wonder at the fall
of a private family -- it is a fate from which even the greatest empires are not
exempt -- but, let me farther convince my kind Harriot, I am not an object of
pity, by giving her a more minute account of my situation; I found Mrs.
Bellmour's house infinitely more elegant, yes, elegant, than I had any idea of;
I have three apartments, which we will call my drawing room, dressing room, and
bed chamber, more than that number I did not aspire to, in my father's house,
it is true, my second is not quite so spacious as my former one there, but for
that very reason, is now preferable, as it is more suitable to my circumstances
-- the furniture is all chintz -- my dear Orlando, has supplied me with a few
well chosen books; I have my harpsichord, my materials for drawing; and, as for
all sorts of elegant works, have only to step down to Mrs. Bellmour, and there
I may at all times, see and copy the greatest variety -- she is delighted with
the honor I have done her, in making choice of her house, and pays me as much
respect, as if she were a stranger to my misfortunes; she has no other lodgers,
though she has another set of apartments, as good as mine, which she can spare,
but has made a point of taking no person, who is not particulaly recommended,
nor is she very anxious about it, as she is in a fair way to make a fortune in
a few years, by her business -- now, tell me, honestly, have I not great reason
to bless Heaven, that I still enjoy so many comforts -- surely, I have --
you will perhaps, tell me, I am excluded from all society, or at least, from such
as I have hitherto been accustomed to -- it is very true, and society is
undoubtedly, the first satisfaction in life -- but, though I had a numerous
acquaintance, it by no means follows, that in their company, I found what I
call society -- it is, in my opinion, a thing no longer understood, it is still
like friendship, much talked of, but where do we find it -- not at public
places, not at card parties, society, according to my ideas, consists in
rational conversation, with sensible well informed people -- where are they to
be met with? that there are many such, I make no doubt, but, what avails it --
a man, or woman, of superior understanding, makes no better figure -- nay, I am
apt to think, a worse figure at a public place, or, card assembly, than one who
can only talk of the weather -- the fashions, the opera, or the last new play
-- and, where does one meet any soul, but at places of this nature? not in
London; so my loss, you see, is not great in that article -- do you, Harriot,
in your conscience, think they understand the matter much better in the country
-- I do not -- during the few months people of fashion spend there, do they not
to the utmost of their power, live exactly as they do in town -- where then is
society to be found -- I say, it is wholly abolished, and in its stead, we have
only an eternal round of insipid dissipation, in which, as I said above, the
fool, makes just as good a figure as the man of sense -- I never passed a
winter in town, except one -- and upon my honor, I never was so tired of any
six months, since I was born, yet, I was then in the first company, nay,
admired too, as a beauty, that circumstance one would think, might have kept
one awake, but I declare to you, I have found on many occasions, more use for
my fan to conceal a yawn, than for any other purpose; how often have I been,
one of a large circle of belles and beaux, for hours together, without hearing
a single sentence uttered worth attending to; yet all affect amazing vivacity,
and a laugh is frequently heard, when not a soul amongst them, if asked, what
gave rise to it, could possibly tell -- it is, as somebody very justly observed,
when talking on this very subject -- all laugh, and no joke -- this is society
-- and this I am likely to be debarred of, if I have not it in my power, to mix
as formerly, with the beau monde -- am I to be pitied -- not one bit --
besides, my new situation has the charm of novelty to reccommend it, and that,
let me tell you, is no small matter -- did ever mortal, you cry, hear any one
so eloquent in praise of adversity -- perhaps not -- but it is my way, Harriot,
to make the best I can of a bad bargain -- and, after all, should I be one jot
the happier, had I given myself up a prey to despair -- had I, instead of thus
endeavoring to forget the past, tormented both you and myself, with unavailing
lamentation -- I doubt the fact, my dear -- my Orlando too, who makes it my
study to keep up my spirits -- shall I not do all in my power to assist him in
his kind purpose; I should little merit his affectionate attention, if I did
not -- here comes the dear creature, I hear his voice below -- farewell -- let
me hear from you soon, and believe me,

Ever your, ISABELLA ROCHLEY.

LETTER the Third.
Same to the Same.
London.
WHAT an angel is Caroline, my dear Harriot -- Oh! she has proved herself the
most generous, the most exalted of women -- you may remember, that I broke off
abruptly hearing my Orlando's voice, enquiring for me -- read that, my
Isabella, cried he, giving me a letter, and confess that the charming Caroline
is, as I ever believed her, a noble minded creature -- I have his permission to
send you the following copy of it, that you may yourself, judge whether she
does not justly merit the encomiums, I have given her

To COLONEL ROCHLEY.
WERE I not thoroughly acquainted with the sentiments of the amiable Colonel
Rochley, I might, perhaps, have scrupled to give him this proof of my
partiality, nor am I ignorant, that there are many of my own sex, and perhaps,
of yours, who would condemn me for it, but I have examined my heart, it acquits
me, and I am in this instance, determined to rest satisfied with its decision
-- to the change in your situation, I give not a thought on my own account,
yourself, not your fortune was ever the object of my attachment -- I know your
worth, and I think, Orlando, I know also, that you have a tolerable opinion of
mine, but, I also know the delicacy of your sentiments -- these, if I do not
mistake your character, will lead you to fancy it incumbnet on you, to give up
all thoughts of the poor Caroline, because, truly, it is no longer in your
power, to produce a rent, roll equal to hers -- this may, for ought, I know, be
deemed mighty noble, mighty generous, and all that -- but, it does not, my good
friend, accord with my ideas, nor, do I mean to let you so easily off, you have
-- at least you told me so a thousand times -- I say, you have freely and
voluntarily given me your heart; I have long looked upon it as my property --
with your heart, I made not a doubt, that I should, in due time, be able to
prevail on you, to give me also your hand; nay, so certain was I of it, that I
had privately made a vow, never to bestow mine on any other of your sex; a
pretty scrape then, I am likely to be brought into, should you make a point of
playing the hero, and for the before mentioned ridiculous reasons, give me up
-- I know my very amiable and affectionate wretch of a brother, would see us
both perish, rather than consent to our union -- but, if you will condescend to
wait -- let me see, how long -- O, just four months, and three weeks; I shall
then, be my own mistress, and, as I am, very unwilling to break my vow, and
still, more unwilling to seek out for a new lover; I am, when that happy period
arrives, determined to sue you for damages, should you presume to break yours
-- and, I promise you, I shall claim a pretty considerable sum, nor will it, I
think, be denied me; the loss of my heart, let me tell you, is no joke -- I
accuse you of the theft; deny it if you can -- prepare then, either your
defense -- or, what will give me infinitely more satisfaction, agree to
compromise the affair, by keeping it, and permitting me to retain yours in
return, on this condition, I here, make a second vow, that on the day I shall
become of age, I will offer you my lilly hand in holy matrimony; think of what
has been said, and don't play the simpleton -- you must have a very short
memory, if it is necessary for me to inform you, that,

I am, Most truly, and affectionately, your CAROLINE WESTBURY*


P. S. Do not fancy I have formed the above resolution, without mature
reflection -- no -- I am too wise, too prudent for that, believe me -- I have
weighed the matter, as thus -- in one scale, I put myself* and my twenty
thousand pounds -- in the other, your worship, your colonel's commission, with
all your accomplishments of mind, and person -- when, behold, my Ladyship's
scale instantly kicked the beam, nay, so very unequal were they, that I am
positively certain, could I have thrown fifty thousand more into it, there it
would have stuck -- the duce is in it then, if I shall not have the best
bargain -- adieu. --

You have now, I presume, read the delightful girls letter -- what do you think
of her, my dear Harriot -- is she not a spirited, charming creature? -- there
are those, she says, who might possibly condemn her -- you, I trust, are not of
the stupid number; for my part, I adore her for her ingenuous candor -- she
knows, Orlando's whole happiness centers in her -- she knows his worth -- who
then, but the most ridiculously prudish, shall presume to say, she has not
acted like an angel -- yes, an angel, I repeat, for, alas, I fear it is not like
the generality of our sex -- well, my dear Orlando, cried I, when I had read
her epistle -- what says your heart, to this proof of your Caroline's folly? --
folly, Isabella -- certainly replied I -- must she not be a very weak creature,
thus, to persist in loving you, merely for those good qualities, which no
reverse of fortune can rob you of -- what are those, compared to an estate of
two thousand a year? -- nothing indeed, I believe, said he, in the estimation
of too many of your sex, Isabella, but my engaging Caroline has a mind -- to
play the fool, cried I, interrupting him, that's all -- but seriously, continued
I, do not now, my dear brother, carry your sentiments of honor or generosity,
too far -- there are obstacles enough to your felicity already; let it be your
business to remove, not by a false delicacy, to add to them; remember, the
lively affectionate Carolines happiness is at stake, as well as yours -- has
she not freely confessed it? -- she has, cried he in raptures, and I am the
happiest of mortals; yes, Isabella, I will look forward with hope -- hope,
replied I, nay, with certainty -- only, beware of that wretch, her brother, I
know no villainy of which he is not capable, suffer him to believe you have now
given up all thoughts of his sister; be cautious how you conduct yourself;
beware, that none of your letters fall into his hands; I have no fears, on your
account, my dear Orlando, it is for your Carolines safety I tremble, wholly in
his power, as she is at present, who can say, what his hatred to to you, and
his sordid avarice may prompt him to? -- go, my beloved brother, go, and answer
the charming girl's letter, as it deserves, but, as I said before, take care
that it is safely conveyed to her -- he left me, the happiest of beings -- yet,
a thousand delicate scruples damped his joy, but I think, conscious as he is,
that her felicity, as I told him, depends upon him, he will conquer them --
thus my dear friend, all my sorrows are at an end -- my Orlando will yet be
happy -- can I then fail to be completely so? -- impossible -- no more
repining, no more reflections then on the past, who can say, what a day can
bring forth? this has been a happy one, to morrow may be no less so --


I trust it will, And am, ever yours, ISABELLA ROCHLEY.

LETTER the Fourth.
Miss LENOX, TO Miss ROCHLEY.
Northampton.
YOU are persuaded, you say, in one of your letters, I shall love you with more
sincerity now, in your adversity, than ever I did in your days of prosperity --
why, really my dear Isabella, the thing is mighty easily accounted for, though,
it is not exactly according to the modern ideas of friendship; have I not, by
this change in your situation, had an opportunity to discover a thousand good
qualities in you, which, but for that, neither you nor I might ever have
suspected you possessed? -- how could it ever have entered my head, that
Isabella Rochly, born and bred in affluence, accustomed from her infancy, to
all the luxuries, all the gratifications wealth could bestow, should, when
unexpectedly robbed of them all, continue the same lively, cheerful creature
she ever was -- who, I say* could have believed it? -- well, may you say, you
bid defiance to poverty -- with a mind, as yours evidently is formed, what, as
you say, have you to fear? -- all this is great -- is noble, my dear Isabella,
yet, though convinced your sentiments are right, rational, and all that -- I
cannot help feeling -- aye, and fearing too -- but you will tell me, I am a
Job's comforter -- it is very true -- the fact is, had you, as every other
mortal in your case, would have done, filled your letters with sighs and tears
with ahs! -- and ohs! as long as my arm -- I should have taken ^he other side
of the question, and have endeavored to console you, by every means in my
power -- but your astonishing resignation -- your truly christian philosophy,
leaves me nothing to say -- I can only wonder and admire -- and love you most
affectionately.

Having therefore, nothing more to do, let us chat as usual, (...) on a late
event, merely, a^ on an unpleasant dream -- and first, for the charming
Caroline -- no, no, believe me, I am not one of the stupid number, who condemn
her, if any such there be, which I very much doubt -- at least, if they are
acquainted with Orlando Rochley, I pronounce the thing impossible -- one there
is -- him, I had forgot, but, he is a wretch, not worth naming, her brother, I
mean -- but, though, not worth naming -- he is an object to be feared -- do you
know, Isabella, I am assured, he is at this moment in treaty with one of his
gambling companions, who has taken it into his head, to fancy himself capable
of being desperately in love ^^th the dear girl; Sir John, has lost a very
considerable sum of money to him -- I believe, at the last Newmarket races;
this sum he has promised to give up, on condition he receives the h^nd of
Caroline, in its stead; and also, to accept fifteen thousand, instead of the
twenty, to which she is entitled, on the day she is of age -- this, I am
informed, and from pretty good authority, is the bargain these two worthy
Baronets have struck; judge you, whether they will leave any stone unturned to
accomplish their vile plot; Sir John, it is well known, is over head and ears in
debt -- Sir James Henderson, rich as a jew, and though incapable of a real
attachment, spares no expense to gratify his passions -- or, the whim of the
moment -- I tell you this, my dear Isabella, not that I have any apprehensions,
farther than the trouble they may occasion -- thank heaven, we live in a land
of liberty; a woman cannot be forced into matrimony against her will -- and of
all women, Caroline Westbury, is least likely; she has more sense, more spirit,
than half the fellows in England, consequently, they will make but a bungling
hand of the business, but, as I said above, they may torment, and give her a
great deal of trouble -- you may do as you please, in regard to informing your
dear brother, of what I now tell you; I think it may not be amiss, knowing ones
enemies, one may the better guard against their machinations; indeed, being
master of her generous heart, I think he has nothing to fear, he has only to
have patience, and, as you say, all will do mighty well -- but why, my dear
Isabella, this very retired plan of yours? -- I see no reason for it, why not
enjoy a little society, I was going to say -- forgetting you had proved to me,
it is a thing no longer existing -- perhaps, not according to your antiquated
notions; but you in your turn forget, that all one has to do in this world of
ours, is to take things as we find them; while thus indulging your simple plan,
(the only simple one by the way, you ever formed) -- the world will take it for
granted, you are weeping and wailing your misfortunes unable to bear this
reverse with proper resignation, take my word for it, they will never be kind
enough to impute your conduct to the real motive, they will be glad to find a
defect in a character hitherto deemed perfect, disappoint them, my dear
Isabella, convince them, your happiness depended not on so fickle a being, as
Madam Fortune, nor, could her ill favored daughter, Miss, rob you of your
felicity -- give them not such a triumph, my dear girl, but, let them see, you
are still the lively, cheerful companion you ever were; I know you have but few
acquaintance in town, but, if amongst those, there are any, whose company can
afford you an hours amusement, why not enjoy it -- I am not without hopes of
spending a few months in London this winter; if I do, emerge you must, for that
I shall spoil your philosophical plan, is most certain, so you may as well drop
it at once; my love to Orlando -- let me hear from you soon, and tell me
whether you have obeyed my commands; remember me also to our old friend Mrs.
Bellmour, and doubt not, the affection of your unalterable,

HARRIOT LENOX.

LETTER the Fifth.
Same to the Same.
Northampton.
I WRITE this in haste, be not too much alarmed, my dear Isabella -- I wish I
could spare you the anxiety these lines I well know must occasion, but I cannot
answer it to my heart, were I to conceal, what so nearly concerns your peace --
Sir John, I am informed by one, who is acquainted with all his motions, has by
some base means or other, seen your brothers letter to Miss Westbury. I suspect
he also knew of hers to him -- be that as it will, he is outrageous, and swears
he will shoot the colonel through the head, rather than she shall give herself
and fortune to a beggar; that was his elegant phrase -- but, above all, to the
man he detests -- it is said, but this I cannot affirm, he set off for London
yesterday -- accompanied by that wretch Henderson -- did they possess one spark
of honor between them, I should be less apprehensive, but they do not -- they
dare not -- I am certain -- they have not sufficient spirit to demand
satisfaction, as it is called, like gentlemen -- they are too conscious of his
superiority, openly to avow their designs, his courage is too well known for
that -- they are mere bullies -- and cowards of course -- all I mean by telling
you this, is, that you may caution your brother -- charge him to be on his
guard -- I really, hardly know what it is I fear -- but, such is my affection
for you both, that even the shadow of danger makes me tremble; should Sir John
really, be gone to town, they may chance to meet, and who can say, what may be
the consequence -- warn Orlando then to avoid him -- I have time for no more,
lest, my well meant intelligence should come too late -- heaven, bless you
both, prays, your affectionate,

HARRIOT LENOX.

LETTER the Sixth.
Miss WESTBURY, TO Lady BELL SYDNEY.
Westbury-Hall.
YOUR ladyship is impatient, you say, to hear how I have settled matters with
my gallant colonel -- why, my dear Lady Bell, had the affair been left to my
management, it would have been happily settled, long ago, for I think I could,
in spite of his heroics, have prevailed on the dear creature, to have taken me
for better, for worse -- yet, such are his obsolete notions of honor --
generosity, and other equally absurd ideas, that I should, I believe in my
conscience, have had enough to do -- but I told you, nay, I sent you a copy of
the epistle I wrote him, on hearing the situation his imprudent father left him
in -- the loss of his fortune, never gave me one hours concern, on my own
account, persuaded mine, is abundantly sufficient to satisfy any two reasonable
people, and reasonable, I have ever found him, except in this instance -- here
truly, his pride steps in, can he think of giving a beggar to the woman he
adores? -- that is, the burden of his melancholy song -- however, as I was
saying, I believe my eloquence might have prevailed, had I been at liberty to
argue the case with him, as I wished, but behold, my good for nothing brother,
has found means to stop all farther proceedings at present -- and, by such
means, as none but a being, like himself, actuated by the basest of all
motives, could have stooped too -- he naturally suspected the change, in
Colonel Rochley's situation, could make none in my sentiments, my attachment,
he knew, was built on a more permanent foundation -- he therefore, made several
attemps to discover my thoughts on the subject, but to no purpose, well did I
know his, and therefore, chose to disappoint him -- however, he was too artful
for me -- he bribed my maid -- she knew I had received a letter from him,
though I never make people in that line my confidents as too many Misses do --
but, having a better opinion of her, than I find she deserved, made no secret
of it -- she knew our attachment, she knew his hand writing -- and, in short,
when questioned on the subject, at the same time, eyeing a purse of gold -- she
answered, as he wished, and promised, I presume, to get him a sight of the
letter -- how she contrived this, I know not, unless by a false key to my
cabinet, as I think, I could not be so careless as to leave it open -- be that
as it will -- a few days ago, while at breakfast with my Tyrant, he with rage,
malice, and a thousand other amiable passions, strongly depicted on his
expressive countenance, produced the said epistle, at the same time, abusing us
both in a language, which would have done credit to an inhabitant of
Billingsgate -- I bore the storm with most provoking philosophic calmness --
this, he, poor soul, could not bear -- we females, my dear Lady Bell, have a
thousand times more command of our tempers, than these lords of the creation,
as they style themselves -- so you have really been mean spirited enough, cried
he, half choked with passion, to offer yourself to this fellow? -- even, so
replied I, and pray brother, what can you possibly have to say to it -- it
cannot surely, interfere with your happiness, you, fond, as you ever were of
me, cannot marry me yourself, what, in the name of common sense, then is it to
you who does? provided he is a gentleman, a man of worth, of character -- he is
neither, cried he, he is a d -- nd -- stop, my good friend, said I,
interrupting him -- no naughty words I beseech you -- you know -- yes, well do
you know, Colonel Rochley is all I have described, but I also know, not only,
that you have long entertained sentiments for him, which do no great credit to
your understanding, but I know also the cause -- his evident superiority, not
his inferiority, Sir John, is the crime you cannot pardon; he has made you look
rather simple, on more occasions than one, it is no secret, my good brother, you
know it is not -- I might not now, or ever, have reproached you with it, had
you not thus compelled me to it, in order to justify my partiality, by proving
to you, he has no other fault, even in your eyes -- surely, he is not
answerable for the misconduct of his father, more than I am, for that of my
brother, his family -- his -- d -- n -- his family, cried he -- well, if you
insist upon it, replied I, with a provoking smile I fear, I cannot help it, but
pray, spare the colonel -- my dear Lady Bell, I actually thought he would have
beat me -- and, perhaps I did deserve a box on the ear -- to cut this matter
short, continued I, and to save all farther altercation on the subject, I now
declare to you freely, and heartily; I am fully determined to give my hand to
this beggar, the very day I can also present him with it, my fortune -- till
then, I have no such intention, nor shall you then be such a cursed fool, cried
he, if I can help it, and I think I shall find ways for that -- so saying, away
he bounced -- I soon followed, in order to lecture my abigail, fully persuaded,
she had betrayed me, if I may call it so, though, as I never trusted her, I
believe, it is not exactly the case -- on questioning her, she denied the whole,
but in such a manner, that I was fully convinced in her guilt, and accordingly
dismissed her without farther ceremony -- thus have I given those particulars
you wish to be acquainted with, my present situation is none of the
pleasantest, but, thank heaven, I am not very apt to give way to despair; the
time is at no great distance, when I shall be at full liberty, to act as I
think proper; teazed in the mean time, I expect to be, but have made up my mind
to bear it; I might, no doubt, quit our family mansion, and take up my
residence with some of my friends, but it would answer no good purpose, for the
fact is, they, one and all, pronounce me imprudent at least, thus to throw
myself and fortune away, as they call it, on a man, who cannot, now, make such
settlements as I am entitled to -- I, on the contrary, tell them, he has made
all I ever had an ambition for -- he has settled his heart upon me -- I hear
his charming sister chose to live in London, rather than continue in the
country, where the misfortunes of her family, will of course, be a subject of
conversation for ages -- I think, she judged perfectly right -- there too, she
is more immediately under the protection of her generous noble minded brother;
Oh! how much contrast to mine! I am told, she resembles him, both in mind and
person -- happy, my dear Lady Bell, should I have been, had it been in my
power, to offer the lovely girl an asylum with me -- such a companion would
have been the most desirable thing in life, but my brother's rooted aversion to
her whole family, puts that out of the question at present -- when the happy
day arrives, that he is no longer my master, I shall make it my first request,
to my dear Rochley -- till then, Imust deny myself that pleasure -- in spite of
the pretty trick that has been played me, I shall contrive some means to
continue a correspondence with him, but there is no hurry, we know each others
sentiments, that is the most material point -- and so the matter rests, adieu,
my dearest friend -- you see I am in a fair way to be one of the poor
persecuted damsels -- this comes of falling in love -- take care how you, my
dear, get into this unfortunate scrape -- and believe me, most truly,

Your affectionate, CAROLINE WESTBURY.

LETTER the Seventh.
Miss ROCHLEY, TO Miss LENOX.
London.
A Thousand thanks, my dearest Harriot, for your friendly intelligence, I
instantly made my brother acquainted with it, who had the civility to laugh at
our feminine apprehensions -- how can you, my dear Orlando, said I, make a joke
of what, to us appears a very serious cause of alarm? why, my sweet Isabella,
replied he, because fighting is my profession, would you then, have me like
you, tremble at the thoughts of a sword, or pistol? -- no, certainly cried I,
Heaven forbid, had you a man of honor to deal with, but who can say, what a
wretch like Sir John may be capable of -- I vow I should not wonder, if he had
you assassinated -- no, no, Isabella, when you form plans of that nature, you
must lay the scene in Spain, or Portugal, there we hear of adventures of that
nature, though I Will be sworn, where one story of the kind is true, fifty are
false; depend upon it, you have nothing of that kind to apprehend -- certain it
is, I should be sorry, on my Carolines account, to have a fracas with him, nay,
for her sake, and for yours too, my dear Isabella, I will not seek an occasion
of meeting him; as far as I can with honor, I will even avoid it -- but, if by
chance we do meet -- and he should presume to insult me, by look or word, why
my dear, I shall endeavor to teach him better manners -- but take my word for
it, he has too much regard for his person to put it needlessly in danger -- I
know him of old -- he has adopted Hudibras's maxim Great are the perils that
inviron,
The man who meddles with cold iron.
but should it come to that, be assured he will be wise enough to consider, that

He who fights, and runs away,
May live to fight another day;
But he who is in battle slain,
Will never rise to fight again.
was it possible Harriot, to forbear laughing in spite of my fears, at the idea
this gave me of his antagonist -- I confess his agreeable vivacity put them
almost to flight, I begin to think the creature will not have courage to face
him, for according to Shakespeare, "conscience makes cowards of us all"; and I
am sure, his must accuse him of envy, malice, and a thousand other diabolical
passions -- I again begged my brother for my sake, to be on his guard, he
smiled, saying, he was on the point of obeying me, as he was just going to be
on guard, at the Tower -- you choose to be witty, my dear Orlando, said I, but,
though this duty will prevent me seeing you for some time, I rejoice to hear
you are obliged to be there, as I think the wretch will not have courage to
follow you to a place so capable of making a vigorous defense -- he now, kindly
kissed my cheek, bid me fear nothing, be cheerful, amuse myself the best way I
could, till he saw me again, and left me much more at ease, than when he
entered; certain of his Carolines attachment, master of her invaluable heart,
he is as happy as this world can make him.

You do not, my dear Harriot, altogether approve my retired plan of life -- I
have made no vows to seclude myself from the world, should I ever meet with a
temptation to enter into its amusements -- far from it, I am of too sociable a
disposition for that, but I think, decency, propriety, not to mention my own
feelings, forbid it at present -- you forget Harriot, it is not many months
since my dear father's death, and however we may have suffered by his imprudent
conduct -- I lament it most unfeignedly -- another reason I have too, which you
have also forgot -- shall I -- can I, do you think take advantage of my
Orlando's generosity, and run into any unnecessary expenses? forbit it, heaven
-- no, no, Harriot -- I will content myself for a while with such amusements as
I can enjoy, without robbing him of the little he is now master of -- a time
may come, when he can better spare it, and I am not so old, as to fear a decay
in my charms, before I have an opportunity to display them to the world -- in
the mean time, assure yourself, I am not merely comfortable, but, as happy as a
queen -- I am upon my honor, and as a proof of it, I am just going to sing, and
play Seaton Cliff -- a new song, my Orlando brought me this morning, he tells
me I shall like it -- adieu,

Ever yours, ISABELLA ROCHLEY.

LETTER the Eighth.
Miss WESTBURY, TO Lady* BELL SIDNEY.
Westbury-Hall.
I HAVE since you last heard from me, my dear Lady Bell, met with a trifle
which gave (and very foolishly) half an hour's uneasiness -- not more, for a
moment's cool reflection convinced me, 'twas an artifice of my brothers, and
his friend, Sir James Henderson -- but take the particulars.

A few days ago we had dined, tete a tete -- he was in better temper than
usual, not a word of the colonel was said -- it is a subject I never start,
though of all others, the most pleasing to me; he chose to be very eloquent in
praise of Sir James, was astonished I did not see him in the same favorable
light, so fine a fortune -- such great connections, etc. and then so
distractedly in love with me, so constant, in spite of the cold reception his
addresses met with -- I owned it was very astonishing, as I was reckoned a girl
of taste, but there was no help for it, some people were blind to their own
interest, and I supposed I was one of the unlucky number -- he did not, I
believe, greatly relish my manner of expressing myself, but said no more.

On his quitting the room, I observed a letter lying by the chair he had sat on
-- it was open -- I cannot say I felt any sort of curiosity to view the
contents, nor should I, had I not, by mere chance, seen the name of Rochley; I
am now persuaded he had dropped it in that open manner, that I might see it,
sensible, nothing less would tempt me to peruse it, and in this instance, he
really did discover some share of sagacity.

Here follows a copy of the delectable scrawl; I own, as I said before, I was
weak enough to be fluttered, for about half an hour --

Dear Jack,
You may make yourself perfectly easy, would I could hope the news I now send
you, were likely to make me so -- who knows but it may, your charming sister
may possibly, when convinced, as she soon will be, that her favored colonel is
unworthy the honor she does him, treat me with less severity -- he is at this
very time, paying his addresses to a merchant's daughter in the city; she has
fifty thousand pounds in her own power, and they say, her heart fell a
sacrifice to his red coat, and cockade some time ago at Almack's -- she freely
told him so -- and made him an offer of that convenient sum, on condition he
would take her into the bargain; to this, he very wisely agreed, and they are
to be married without farther ceremony, next week. -- What I tell you, you may
depend upon as a fact, for I had it from the girls brother, (father she has
none) and he curses her for a fool -- so you may make yourself easy, no fear of
his being grafted into your family now. -- One thing I make a point of; not a
word of this to your sister, I wish not to be the first who shall inform her of
it, she may perhaps fancy I am mean enough to triumph on the occasion -- I do
not -- I own I cannot help being highly pleased, because I flatter myself, were
he once fairly out of her reach, she may chance to cast a favorable eye upon
your humble servant. -- One thing is certain, if she does not -- curse me, if I
care a straw if all the rest of her sex were blind. -- Once more, mind what I
say -- no tatling -- I know you will be bursting to tell her -- but, if you do
-- or at least, if you give me as the author of the intelligence, I Will blow
your brains out the next time we meet; my officiousness, as she will call it,
can only give her a worse impression of me, than she has already, and that is
needless -- so be dumb, I charge you, she will hear it soon enough from others,

Yours, JAMES HENDERSON,


How do you like it Lady Bell? -- artful, and really better manufactered than I
believed either of them capable of -- I hope you will own it was enough to
stagger one at the first reading -- I confess it did me -- for after all, men
are but men. However, I am fully determined not to believe one word of the
matter -- and, as I love to do things openly and honestly, I have treated my
colonel with a copy of it, enclosed in a few lines from myself; civilly
desiring he will himself tell me, whether there is any truth in it, as I would
sooner take his word, than that of any other person -- at the same time, adding
my opinion, which as I have already told you is, that it is an abominable
falsehood -- I did not think it quite convenient to tell him, who was the
eloquent author of this epistle, that might have led to disagreeable
consequences -- but, what you will grant, is still a better joke, I have taken
no notice of having found it, though, that it was dropped on purpose for me to
pick up, is as clear as noon day -- I could expire with laughing at the
thoughts of my having thus disappointed the dear creatures, by pretending to
know nothing of the matter.

When we met at tea -- I found my brother was brimfull of expectation -- I
affected to be more gay, more lively than usual -- yet, took care not to over
act my part; I was humming a favorite air, when he came in, and continued it;
he was visibly in the fidgets -- tried first one chair, then another -- but all
in vain -- I made the tea with all imaginable composure -- and at last, finding
I would not break the ice, and of course, fearing the matter would come to an
untimely end, if he did not lend a helping hand to restore it.

Caroline said he, looking very like a fool; pray did you find a letter? I have
dropped one some where, and cannot, for my soul, find it.

You see, my dear Lady Bell, I had nothing for it, but to tell an absolute lie
mincing the matter would have spoiled the joke -- no, replied I, I really saw
none -- no, cried he, shocked to death at the very idea that his plot should
have miscarried -- surely you must, for I am pretty certain, I had it in my
pocket at dinner -- are you equally certain, said I, you have not lost it out
of doors? O! quite so, replied he, it must have fallen in the dining room,
while taking out my handkerchief, it is very likely, said I, I will ring, and
order a servant to look for it, it may be there still, perhaps, or some of them
may have picked it up -- I hope it is of no great importance, in case it is not
to be sound? -- this was an awkward sort of a question, was it not, my dear
Lady Bell? he felt it to be so, and looked more foolish, if possible, than
before, and waved giving an answer -- I rung the bell -- John step into the
dining room, and see if you can find a letter there, your master has dropped
one, and fancies it was in that room -- away went John.

I need hardly tell you the poor epistle was not to be found -- make farther
enquiries said I, amongst the servants, some of them may have got it -- lost,
it cannot be, in the house, and, unless there were bank bills in it, I can
hardly suppose any of them can have motives for, not restoring it -- I hope it
contained none, brother.

Such was the command I had of my countenance, my dear friend, that, I saw
plainly, I had fairly taken him in -- no, you never saw mortal in so ridiculous
a situation -- it is impossible to conceive it -- what was now to be done? here
was a fine well concerted plot blown to air, he had sense enough to see, that
telling me the contents would never do -- 'twas too late -- I should
immediately suspect he had dropped it on purpose, or, why not have told me the
mighty news at dinner, if he could do it now -- this argument might have no
weight, had the business been of an honest nature* I am sensible -- but, here
the case was different, he felt I should not believe one word of the story, if
told simply, without all the coroberating circumstances contained in the
unfortunate epistle -- it was to do it justice, wrote most plausibly -- Sir
James begging he would not inform me of it, for instance -- how now, tell it
without disobeying that injunction, and of course, robbing his poor friend of
the merit, he hoped to acquire, by that very injunction: This was a dilema not
to be got over.

What then could the silly soul do better than let the matter drop? and this,
he very prudently did -- whether this disaster will cure them of ploting,
heaven only knows -- you see not a doubt remains with me, that it was a plot --
though I have not yet had it cleared up, by my dear Rochley.

This I hope to have in a few days, as I have taken effectual care, neither my
letter, nor his answer shall again fall into my brothers hands -- and he, I
fancy, fearing his answer to his confederate, might, by some unlucky chance,
fall into mine, has thought proper to set off full speed, for London, to tell
the story in person

I would give something to hear their dialogue on the subject; poor Sir John
can make but a very so, so, figure on the occasion, his friend will set him
down as a mere marplot, though, I think I have the best title to that
appellation -- for, 'twas certainly I that marred it.

I flatter myself the story will divert your ladyship, and so I leave you, that
you may laugh without interruption.

Yours, ever, CAROLINE WESTBURY.

LETTER the Ninth.
Miss ROCHLEY, TO Miss LENOX.
London.
ALAS, my dear Harriot, your fears, your kind apprehensions were but too well
founded! -- I may now say, I am as wretched a being as ever existed --
completely wretched -- it is possible, the dreadful news may, ever this have
reached you, but the particulars cannot, and well I know the melancholy story
will be told by my loved brothers enemies, with every possible aggravation, for
it is known only to them -- the particulars I mean, alas! the event can be no
secret! -- I am almost blind with weeping, and can scarce see what I write,
yet, what other consolation is now left me? -- little did your poor Isabella
think, when she last wrote to you in such good spirits, that she was in a few
days to be reduced to such deplorable distress, you have seen me bear the loss
of fortune without a sigh, still blessed with the tender affection of a beloved
brother, I found nothing wanting to my happiness -- he was all the world to me
-- but I have, perhaps, seen him for the last time -- Oh my Harriot! do I live
to write it? I cannot proceed -- my heart is torn with anguish, it bleeds for
the misfortunes of my amiable Orlando -- yes, my dear Harriot, it is still for
him I mourn -- all his prospects of felicity are now for ever blasted -- fate
has done its worst, he has mortally wounded the brother of his Caroline --
judge then the condition I am in at this distracting moment.

Sitting some days ago at my harpsichord, in order to practice another new song
the dear creature had sent me, that I might sing it to him, when next he called
-- the following letter was brought me.

It pains me more than I can express, to give my tender, my affectionate
Isabella, one moments uneasiness -- think then, my beloved sister, what I now
suffer, while thus obliged to tell her, I fear it may be long ever I see her
again -- Oh! that I could find words to soften the sad story, for gladly would
I, at the instant I am under the cruel necessity of wounding your feeling
heart, also, pour into it, the balm of consolation, but my wishes are vain --
know then my Isabella, your brother has wounded -- and, alas! it is seared
mortally -- the brother of the woman he adores -- need I add more to convince
you I am wretched? -- before you receive this, I shall be on my way to the
continent; I fly, my beloved Isabella, more for your dear sake than my own --
the idea of leaving you friendless, I could not stand, I fly, in order to
preserve a life, which, for your sake, and for yours only, I think worth my
care, had there been any witness to the transaction, on whose honor I could
have depended, I should have had little or nothing to apprehend, but there
unfortunately was not -- Sir John and his friend Henderson, were alone privy to
it -- a few persons however, gathered round us when the deed was done, and the
former then, in dying accents, had the baseness to declare to them, I was the
aggressor and his murderer -- this horrid, this false accusation Sir James
endeavored to confirm -- what then had I to hope? they might have considered
that, as there were two to one, the story appeared improbable, but, in the
confusion, a scene of this nature naturally occasions this reflection, did not
occur, or, father was not attended to, for I offered it in my justification --
happily for me, the night was exceedingly dark, and, while they were employed
in conveying him to the nearest surgeon, I made my escape, and, instantly
getting into the first carriage I met with, drove home, put up a few things,
and accompanied by my faithful Frederick, jumped into a post chaise, and set
off for Dover; this I write at the first stage, my beloved Isabella -- you
shall hear from me again, when safely landed on the other side of the water --
keep up your spirits, my dear sister, exert that fortitude, you have on a
former melancholy crisis, given such evident proofs you are possessed of --
remember, it will be the greatest consolation I can now enjoy, to hear you do
not sink under this affliction -- God bless and preserve you, my Isabella, and
grant we may yet meet again in happier days, prays your ever tenderly attached,
and truly,

Affectionate Brother, ORLANDO ROCHLEY.


Happily for me, the worthy Mrs. Bellmour came with it herself -- I had no
sooner cast my eyes over the distracting contents, then I fell lifeless on the
sopha where I sat -- but my grief you will naturally conceive, so need not
attempt to describe what I felt at that terrible moment, or, what I still feel
-- I am unable to write any more at present -- alas! why should I, what can I
say that will not distress you, as well as myself? -- I am dying with
impatience, to hear again from my poor Orlando -- Mrs. Bellmour informs me this
moment, the vile Sir John is still alive, though, there are no hopes of his
recovery -- wretched as he has made me, I, yet, for my beloved brothers sake,
earnestly pray that he may survive it; Oh! Harriot* pity me, and join your
prayers to those of your

Ever affectionate, but truly unhappy* ISABELLA ROCHLEY*

LETTER the Tenth.
Miss WESTBURY TO Lady BELL SIDNEY.
LONDON.
I Would sooner have acknowledged the favor of your kind, your affectionate
letter, my dear Lady Bell, had it been in my power -- but what with the
dreadful shock I have met with, and the hurry of my journey, it was impossible
-- I know you will forgive the seeming want of attention, at a time like this
-- I arrived in town sooner by some hours, than I believed it could have been
done, indeed I never quitted the carriage, but drove night and day, such was my
impatience to see my poor brother. Alas, I no longer remember his unkindness,
his present situation alone engrosses all my care -- he still lives, my dear
friend, and the surgeons tell me, he may linger for some time; but they give me
no farther hopes -- he appeared sensible of my attention, in thus hurrying to
town? but shocked me beyond expression, by the ungenerous manner in which he
mentioned Colonel Rochley -- ungenerous I must call it, since no power on earth
will ever be able to persuade me he could act in a dishonorable manner -- this,
my dear Lady Bell, is a point from which I never will recede, in whatever light
the rest of the world may look upon the unfortunate affair.

He is my brother it is true -- but this circumstance alone, shall not tempt me
to do injustice to the most amiable, the most worthy of men; though, alas! that
man can now be nothing to me, my hopes of happiness are for ever destroyed,
whether he is innocent or guilty, but still I will be just -- Oh no! -- it was
not in his nature to take undue advantage of even his greatest enemy -- never
shall they persuade me of it -- who, but the prejudiced can give credit to so
cruel an aspersion; nay, were not appearances strongly against (must I say) my
unfortunate brother? surely they were -- he was accompanied by his friend --
Colonel Rochley was alone when they met -- this, even they themselves cannot
deny -- but they add, he was the agressor, he sought the quarrel, by first
insulting Sir John -- never will I believe it -- no, his regard for me, I am
well assured, would have prevented that, I know it perfectly; nay, I am no less
certain, he would, on my account, have put up with more from him, than from any
man breathing, I know it well -- great must have been the provocation, that
could tempt him to an action, which he could not but be sensible must put an
end to all his hopes of obtaining the hand of your Caroline -- so that whatever
happens -- whether my brother lives, or dies, he is as far as the nature of the
shocking case will admit justified in my opinion -- Oh! how my heart bleeds for
his amiable sister, my dear Lady Bell, what must her distress be at this cruel
moment? did I but know where to find her, I would fly to offer every
consolation in my power -- indeed I would let the illjudging world say what
they pleased, my own feelings would acquit me, my heart tells me it would be an
act of humanity, and I would trust to its dictates -- but I have not the
smallest clue to guide me to the lovely mourner. She may by this time possibly
have left London -- my brother asks for me, I hear, I must bid your Lordship
adieu,

Ever yours, CAROLINE WESTBURY.

LETTER the Eleventh.
Colonel ROCHLEY TO ISABELLA.
CALAIS.
DURST I but flatter mysel?, this would find my dearest sister tolerably
recovered from the shock, I am but too sensible my last letter would give her,
half my distress would be at an end -- after a few hours sailing, I arrived
safely here, and safely I may remain here, till my unfortunate affair can be
happily adjusted; let this console you, my beloved Isabella, during my absence,
long it will not be, I hope, happen what will; I have friends, and powerful
ones too, who will do all they possibly can to serve me; I am, therefore, under
no apprehensions for the consequences, your Orlando's honor, has never yet,
thank Heaven, been called in question, nor will it now.

I have sent over the real state of the case to my worthy General, I have
received many proofs of his friendship and regard, and am certain he will not
now withdraw them -- the ungenerous account Sir John wished to propagate, be
assured, my Isabella will not gain credit, my character is too well known, so
is his -- I say not this by way of reflection on him, I scorn the thought -- I
mention it merely as a matter from which you my sister may draw some
consolation -- he still lives, I find by a letter I received yesterday from a
friend -- who can say, but he may yet recover? -- independent of my own safety
it would give me unspeakable satisfaction -- believe me I am not one of those
who can, however honorably, be the death of a fellow creature, without remorse;
I, my dear Isablla, though conscious the fatal deed was done in self-defence,
feel it a very serious matter, and trust that circumstance will acquit me in
the sight of Heaven, in the opinion of the world, I cannot doubt but it will --
let me hear from you immediately, I will give you my address before I seal my
letter, let me have the happiness of hearing you have exerted yourself on this
occasion, that you bear the trial as becomes one of your excellent
understanding; tell me also, whether Mrs. Bellmour is as attentive, as anxious
to render your situation agreeable and convenient, as she was when I left you
-- and tell me truly -- I will not knowingly, suffer my Isabella to be treated
with disrespect* -- I think she is incapable of it -- I have been thinking, I
know not how justly, that it might perhaps save you some trouble, were you to
change your name till my return; what I mean is, the friends of Sir John may
possibly be indelicate enough, should they by chance find out your place of
residence to make some impertinent inquiries about me -- this may not -- indeed
it is not very probable it should happen; but I would, to the utmost of my
power, guard my beloved sister from even the shadow of an insult, and I should
look upon any enquiry they might think proper to trouble you with, in regard to
the affair in that light; at any rate, it can have no bad effects, the idea
occured to me, I therefore mention it, though I believe on reflection it is
quite unnecessary, so do as you please my dear.

You may possibly wonder how I have been able to write so long a letter,
without once naming Miss Westbury -- no longer you see, dare I indulge myself
in calling her my Caroline -- that is a felicity I must now resign -- yet, she
is dear, infinitely dear to me, and must ever be so while I have life -- but,
though all my fond, my flattering hopes are thus cruelly blasted, I would not
willingly forfeit her esteem, I have therefore presumed (unhappily
circumstanced as I am) to write to her, that I might as far as is consistent,
with truth and honor, justify myself; I have the vanity to believe she will not
readily give credit to any report she may hear, if any such there are that will
throw a stain on my character, I think she will do me more justice -- even the
word of a dying brother, should he dare to persist in his first ungenerous,
ungentleman like assertion, will not, I am confident, induce her, to believe I
could act dishonourably.

I have frequently regretted my dear Isabella, that with minds so congenial as
yours and my beloved Caroline's, you should be strangers to each other -- yet,
alas! what would it now have availed? -- you would only have been more sensible
of her worth, and of course, have felt your Orlandos disappointment the more
severely -- adieu, my sister, my friend, let me soon receive such a letter from
you, as you think, will give pleasure to the heart of your tenderly attached,

And affectionate Brother, ORLANDO ROCHLEY.

LETTER the Twelfth
ISABELLA, TO Colonel ROCHLEY.
London.
YES -- I will endeavor to write such a letter as I think will give pleasure
to the heart of the most amiable of brothers, is there any effort in my power,
I would not exert to the utmost, for this dear purpose? oh no! -- I have
recovered the sad shock your former letter gave me, indeed I have -- I am quite
well again -- even you my Orlando, who give me credit for so large a share of
fortitude, would be amazed to see how well I bear it -- are you not pleased
with your poor Isabella for this? but I am sure you are -- through Mrs.
Bellmours means, I hear daily of Sir John, and have at length the inexpressible
happiness of informing you he is not only still alive, but the doctors begin to
have hopes -- faint hopes they are, I believe, but this is something, I shall,
with the probability of that wished event, his recovery I mean, be able to bear
your absence without repining -- for not, for worlds, would I have you return
till you can do it with perfect safety, and this cannot be till he is
pronounced out of danger, which is yet very far from being the case -- at
present he has not only his wounds to contend with, but a violent fever,
occasioned by them, they say -- alas what will they not say, to aggravate the
melancholy event? indeed Mrs. Bellmour tells me, should he thus linger for a
twelvemonth, and dye at the end of it, the surgeons may pronounce them the
cause of his death -- is this possible? -- yet it may to be sure, bring on a
bad state of health, which may -- but let me not think of it -- I will believe
better things.

I rejoice to hear you have wrote to Miss Westbury -- or, shall I say your
Caroline? yes, I will indulge the dear hope that she may yet be yours -- should
her brother live, who can prevent it -- and is there not now a probability?
what would I not have given for this a few days ago -- I mistake the charming
girls character exceedingly, my dear Orlando, if she can so far mistake yours,
as to harbor a thought injurious to your honor -- she knows you too well --
and I must say she knows her brother too well also, to take his word for -- an
impossibility.

And now let me do justice to my good friend Mrs. Bellmour, by answering your
sweetly kind enquiries -- believe me, she is more attentive, more obliging, if
possible, every day; I really can never be sufficiently grateful for her tender
care of me, when I first heard of the sad affair which has robbed me of your
dear society -- I will, now I have pretty well got over the shock, confess I
thought it would have killed me, so did my truly kind friend, I believe, and,
but for such a friend I cannot say what might happened -- but I am now as I
before assured you, quite well, and you see, in better spirits than my Orlando
expected -- a-propos -- I had almost forgot to answer one part of your dear
letter, I mean in regard to changing my name for a while -- I cannot see any
necessity for it, that is certain -- yet, two circumstances have determined me
to do it -- the first, because the idea took its rise from my ever kind and
considerate brothers care of his grateful Isabella, none but a mind delicate,
and anxious as yours, could have formed one of that nature -- had I no other
motive, that alone, would have induced me to adopt the plan; the second is as
follows:

The day before yesterday, a person quite a stranger to Mrs. Bellmour, stopped
her as she was going out at the door, and she says, in an awkward kind of a
manner, asked the young lady's name, who lodged with her -- pray let me first
ask you, replied she; what is your reason for desiring to know? -- the man not
being prepared sor this very prudent question I presume, hesitated, and was at
a loss how to answer it -- but again begged she would tell him -- you must
excuse me, Sir, said she, I do not think myself authorized to do it without her
permission -- you are a stranger to me, and of course, to the lady, since you
do not even know her name -- I have several young people in my house, and
consequently cannot be certain which of them you mean, if your business is of a
nature necessary for any one of them to be acquainted with, you must contrive
to inform her of it in a proper manner -- but I am persuaded you are mistaken
-- indeed I am not, replied he -- she left him, but instead of going out as she
intended, very prudently returned into the house, in order to warn her family
to be on their guard, in case he should make any farther enquiries, or knock at
the door -- she came up to me to tell me, thinking it might afford me a moments
amusement -- now, though I have very little reason to fancy he really did mean
me -- yet, it is possible he might; these are my two reasons -- which, though both
trifling, when taken seperately, yet, when joined, they amount to something,
and so my dearest brother, address your letters for the future, to -- to -- any
Miss you please -- not so neither -- it is necessary to fix on one, though no
matter what -- Miss Beverly, then let it be.

I shall tell Mrs. Bellmour, and give the latter circumstance only, as my
reason for the change -- she, I well know, will approve whatever has prudence
for its motive, and, as I am situated, one cannot be too cautious, a stranger
as I am, and now deprived of my dear protector -- adieu, my beloved brother,
may Heaven preserve, and soon restore you to your,

Ever affectionate, Friend and Sister, ISABELLA ROCHLEY.

LETTER the Thirteenth.
Miss ROCHLEY, TO Miss LENOX.
London.
REjoice with me, my dear Harriot, I have had a second letter from my Orlando,
he is well, is safe, and writes in as good spirits, as a feeling mind in his
unfortunate situation, can be supposed to do -- what a brother am I blessed
with, how kind, how affectionately attentive to every thing that concerns his
poor Isabella, I might name ten thousand instances, but one shall suffice at
present, nor need I indeed have mentioned this, since you my Harriot, know him
well -- but it is in some degree necessary to clear up what is to follow, or
what in fact may as well go before.

Know then, that for a while, th at is to say, till his anxiously wished
return, you are to address your letters to me, by the name of Beverly. -- You
are, I presume, amazed; but I am going to explain the matter, he tells me, that
while reflecting on my present unprotected state, it occured to him, that it
was possible Sir John's family, should they discover where I was to be found,
might be indelicate enough to trouble me with enquiries about him; and, as he
kindly wishes to guard me against every possibility of being insulted, he
proposed my taking another name during his absence. -- Now, though I think
there is no probability of this happening, yet as it was an idea that occured
to my Orlando, whose sentiments are more delicate, more refined in regard to
what concerns our sex, than any mortal I know -- I could not refuse to gratify
him, not that he makes a point of it -- by no means, on the contrary, he
afterward says, he is persuaded it is unnecessary, adding, do as you please.
-- I will certainly do it, as it can have no disagreeable consequences, and may
save me the trouble, he so kindly apprehends -- Miss Beverly, then my dear
Harriot, must for some time be your friend and correspondent.

I have the satisfaction to tell you, I hear Sir John, it is thought, may yet
get over it -- but he is still exceedingly ill, if he does recover, it must be
a work of time, he had lived a very irregular life, his constitution by no
means a good one, and rendered still worse by every kind of intemperance, yet
should he unfortunately die within the twelve month, I am told it may be
imputed to that miserable ren contre -- how dreadful is this, my dear Harriot
-- how very hard upon my darling brother -- but, as I perpetually say, let us
hope the best.

And, now for want of a more important subject to fill the rest of my paper,
let me tell you, I have lately had a peep at some of the beau monde, whose
society you so much wish me to enjoy -- a peep I say, for it was no more --
Mrs. Bellmour is busily employed at present, in embroidering a trimming for the
birthday -- it is for a Lady Beningfield, a young and handsome widow -- I
never beheld any thing more truly elegant, I often sit by her while she is at
work at it, by way of spending an hour agreeably, when tired of my book or
music -- A day or two ago, I was thus engaged, when the fair widow's carriage
drove to the door -- I would have retired, but unluckily they were in the
passage before I could reach it, the street door being open, a servant having
that instant came in, of course I must have met them there -- I returned to my
seat very easy about the matter -- in she swam most affectedly -- followed by
another Lady and a Beau -- a Belle without a Beau, you know my Harriot, would
be as awkward as -- as -- I leave you my dear to find a simile -- the beauty --
elegance, and expressive countenance of her fair friend struck me exceedingly;
never did I behold so much sweetness, yet a great deal of vivacity in any
mortal before, no affectation, no airs -- the other made up of both to her very
finger ends -- now for the Beau, cries my Harriot? -- why, I must do him the
justice to say, he appears, if I may judge from so slight a knowledge of him as
if he deserved a more manly appelation -- except my dear Orlando, I never
beheld so fine a figure, nor a man so perfectly graceful -- mighty fine cries
Harriot, upon my word Isabella, you have a pretty knack at description. --

Must I add, Harriot, your poor friend seemed to attract some degree of their
notice? in spite of the enchanting, the divine trimming, as her ladyship every
moment called it. The young lady gazed upon me in so particular a manner, yet
with so much respect and sweetness in her manner, that I really fancied she was
endeavoring to recollect me believing she had seen me before -- how true this
is I know not, but in that light her glances struck me -- as for his lordship
-- for he was a lord, I soon found -- he of course could not overlook a female,
who has been reckoned something more than tolerable, I caught him peeping --
so, alas! did Lady Beningfield, and many a gentle tap on the shoulder she gave
him, for not paying quite enough attention to the dear trimming; twenty times
did she call him an insensible wretch! and other such phrases peculiar to the
bon ton -- she too once or twice deigned to cast an eye upon me, but soon
changed them to a more pleasing object, by turning to a large mirror, which was
placed most commodiously before her -- all matters settled -- a thousand orders
given, they at length took their leave, her ladyship crying, come creature, why
don't you lead me to my carriage, for the Beau was unfortunately stretching his
neck over Mrs. Bellmour's shoulder, to get a last look at your Isabella -- no
small share of vanity you will cry -- I only relate facts, my dear, and as I am
not overwhelmed with the variety of my amusements, chose to make the most of
this subject, and so farewell.

I am going to write to my beloved Orlando, and must now bid you adieu, not
however, till I have told you, I am ever most truly yours,

ISABELLA ROCHLEY.

LETTER the Fourteenth.
Miss WESTBURY TO Lady BELL SIDNEY.
LONDON.
THANK heaven! my dear Lady Bell, my brother is rather better, the fever is
abated, but he is still in a miserable way, the doctors, however, say he may
possibly live; I am willing to believe the best, though, alas! I fear this is
not their real sentiments -- I must tell your Ladyship an incident which
happened a few days ago -- it is ridiculous I grant, but has nevertheless, made
such an impression on me, that I am tempted to doubt my senses -- Lady
Beningfield called on me the other morning, and insisted on my going with her
to an embroiderers to see a trimming she has ordered for the birthday. She is
no favorite of mine, you know, however, as I had been so long confined to a
sick room, I thought a drive for an hour might raise my spirits -- Lord
Templeton as usual was with her, and is absolutely, if possible, more
irresistible than ever -- you see I can be just though I have given my heart to
another; perhaps had her Ladyship not known of my attachment she might not have
asked my company, since she fears every woman who presumes to cast an eye upon
him has a design upon his heart, which she is determined to conquer or die in
the attempt. -- enter nous I am fully convinced he does not care three straws
sor her; but let her Ladyship make this flattering discovery, it is no affair of
mine. --

All this is nothing to my story however, and my story is a very absurd one
when you get at it -- to the embroiderers we went, my dear Lady Bell -- and
there had my Rochley's name been Beverly, I should not hesitate to swear I saw
his beautiful sister, the resemblance struck me so forcibly I could not keep my
eyes off the elegant creature, in my life I never beheld two beings so
strikingly alike -- the same expressive dark eyes, the same lovely mouth, the
very dimples that so enchantingly play about it, the teeth -- in short, I am
very ridiculous -- her name as I said above I found on somebody speaking to her
is Beverly, and so ends my story -- not so hers, or I am much deceived, for be
she who, or what she will, I will lay my life his Lordship is fairly caught --
it is no wonder, that is certain, -- he had no sooner cast his eyes upon her,
than farewell common sense; not a rational answer could either her Ladyship or
I get from him, though many an inrational question did she torment him with, --
he looked and sighed, and sighed and looked again -- so did her Ladyship I
believe, but with very different sensations -- she smiled, she ogled, she chid,
but could make nothing of him, he was indeed, as she perpetually calls him a
stupid wretch, which being interpreted, means neither more nor less in the
mouth of a very fine lady, than -- you are a divine fellow.

On this unfortunate occasion, however, I fear she meant it literally; and to
mend the matter, we were no sooner seated in the carriage, than he cried, what
a lovely creature was that we have just seen! -- Where, for heavens sake? asked
Lady B. (affecting to look out of the window, by way of making us believe she
fancied he spoke of somebody in the street) -- Where? answered his lordship, --
how, my dear Lady Beningfield, can you ask that question? Surely, you must have
observed her at Mrs. Bellmours, -- not I, truly, returned she, I observed
nothing, lovely there, I give you my word, except my trimming; that is a fib,
thought I, and so thought somebody else. I Will be sworn. Did you too overlook
the charming girl, Miss Westbury, said he, turning to me? Surely, you could not
as you had no trimming to engage your attention. Indeed, I did not, my lord,
nor can I believe her ladyship could do it either, replied I, she is joking,
depend upon it; not I truly, cried she, brideling, I see no joke in it, except
that some people are very apt to discover beauties where others can find none
-- the truth is, I suppose you are both joking, for I can hardly imagine such a
prodigy as you describe could be there, and I not see her. There was now I
recollect it a tall, starched looking thing stuck up there, who gave herself
all the airs of a beauty -- aye, and all the graces too, Lady Beningfield,
cried his lordship. -- At this instant, the wheel of the carriage by some
unlucky -- indeed, I should rather say, lucky means or other, got entangled in
that of a coach passing by us. She took this favorable opportunity to be
amazingly alarmed, screamed, flung herself into his lordship's arms, and there
fainted, as it were -- he could do no less, you know, my dear Lady Bell than be
alarmed also; the matters were soon adjusted between the honest folks without,
but not so within: in vain I held my eau de luce to her nose; in vain my lord
said and did all that lord could do. -- I cannot say I was under any violent
apprehensions, nor he neither I believe; however, as one must get the better of
a fright sooner or later, she at length thought proper to open her languid eyes
faintly exclaiming, "Where am I?"

I had very near replied as Scrub does in the Beaux Stratagem, to the same
question on a similar occasion. -- Here, my lady, since this was certainly the
stratagem of a Belle, -- my lord in pity to her weakness forbear to renew the
subject we were on before, conscious, I believe, that had more to answer for
than the poor wheel. -- They soon after sat me down, and what then passed
between them I know not; but I fear his lordship's thoughts would be too much
engrossed by the charming Miss Beverley, to permit him to play the lover with a
good grace -- indeed I never believed he wished to be looked upon in that light
by Lady B, yet, the world says it is to be a match -- that she wishes it is
abundantly clear, but I cannot bring myself to fancy he has any such intention.
The lady is handsome, no doubt, and rich too -- so is he -- fortune can be no
object to him -- but these widows, my dear Lady Bell, are a dangerous set of
beings, -- there is nothing impossible, she may draw him in perhaps -- it is
certain there has long been a violent flirtation between them, she is artful,
and doats upon him to distraction -- how it will end heaven knows if Miss
Beverly has, as I verily think she has, made a serious impression on him; he
cannot do a wiser thing than to make the most of the fracas above mentioned,
it is a fine foundation for a quarrel, he has only to persist in doing justice
to that lovely girl, and the business is done.

I would give the world to know who she is, and how she came there, for she
appeared to be at home, yet, it is utterly impossible she can belong to Mrs.
Bellmour, -- impossible, -- her air, her manner, in short, her whole appearance
forbids an idea of that nature. -- Adieu, it is ridiculous to think any more
about it.

Yours, ever, C. WESTBURY.

LETTER the Fifteenth.
Miss ROCHLEY, TO Miss LENOX.
London.
WOULD you believe it Harriot? -- yet, after all, why not? Did I not formerly
tell you my days of conquest were yet to come? -- Lord Templeton has actually
been to call upon Mrs. Bellmour, by way of ordering a waistcoat, etc. etc. --
but in fact, as she tells the story, to make a thousand enquiries about your
friend Isabella, -- and pray, said I, a good deal startled, you may well
believe, (fearing he had looked upon me in a light it hurts my pride -- my
delicacy, to think of) -- what answer did you, my dear Mrs. Bellmour make to
his impertinent questions? -- Had his lordship replied she made any that
merited that term, be assured my dear Miss Rochley you should never have been
shocked by the knowledge of them from me. -- I beg your pardon, my good friend,
said I; I ought, indeed, to have done you more justice than to believe you
would have mentioned a subject you thought could give me offense; but those
sort of gay men are but too apt to take liberties with our sex, especially if
friendless and unprotected as I am, it is too true, replied she, but his
lordship, I believe, though young, and a man of fashion, as it is called, has
fewer of the fashionable vices than most of his sex, -- I know his character
well, it is a most amiable one, I never indeed saw him till the morning he first
came here with Lady Beningfield; but much I have heard in his praise I do
assure you.

I own I was a good deal surprised at the manner in which he spoke of you, as I
have heard he is paying his addresses to Lady B; this circumstance made me more
reserved in my answers than perhaps I should otherwise have been* -- Ah! you
could not be too much so, my dear Madam, cried I, piqued at what she mentioned
-- for however polite, however specious his behavior, all the enquiries he
could make, that being the case, must be looked upon as very impertinent -- I
am hurt -- exceeedingly hurt by them I confess, and must entreat you to answer
no more of them -- hear me patiently, said my worthy friend, pray do not
condemn, either his lordship or me, till you have heard all that passed --
again I begged her pardon, and promised to be attentive -- he spoke in
raptures, continued she, yet with the highest respect, begged I would tell him
who you were, of what family, and a thousand things of that nature -- to this,
I replied, your name was Beverly -- that you was a young lady of fashion and
family -- particular business had brought you to town, and as I had had the
charge of your education, you had done me the honor to prefer my house to any
other, being a stranger in London --

And now my lord, continued I, permit me in my turn to ask your reasons, for
wishing to know those circumstances? Miss Beverly is at present under my care,
she is extremely dear to me, and I am of course deeply interested in all that
concerns her -- I honor you for it, replied he, you have certainly a right to
question me in your turn -- I can only say, my motives are such, as even the
charming Miss Beverly could not justly condemn; I was struck with the uncommon
elegance of her person, her graceful manner -- I will be very candid my lord,
said I, finding he now made a pause -- in talking of my accomplished friend,
your lordship uses the language of a lover -- pardon me, if I take the liberty
of observing this is a language; I do not think you can use with propriety on
this occasion -- I am not to learn, my lord, that the world talks loudly, that
you are paying your addresses to -- Lady Beningfield -- no man so circumstanced
should -- I will be candid, also, cried he, interrupting me -- the world is
very much deceived, if that is its opinion; be assured, had that been the case,
I would have spared you the trouble I have now given you -- of this I give you
my honor -- so saying, my dear Miss Rochley, he took his leave -- and I hope
you will now acquit me of having been guilty of any impropriety.

Indeed I do, replied I; I ought to have known you were incapable of it, my
dear Mrs. Bellmour; yet you cannot, I think, wonder that a circumstance of this
kind should surprise me, nor after all, can I conceive what his lordship means,
I wish it may not be something relating to my dearest brother -- but that is
absurd -- I forget he believes my name Beverly -- she smiled at my speech;
saying, indeed Miss Rochley, were you not more void of vanity than thousands
are, who have smaller pretensions to it, you could not, I think, be at a loss
to guess -- he was as he says, and I will take upon me to affirm, he says
truth, struck with your beauty -- nothing could be more natural -- he has not
the character of a libertine -- he has a very large fortune -- is his own
master -- the enquiries he has made, are a convincing proof to me, that the
wound you have made in his heart is not a slight one -- whether it will heal
without his, applying to you for a cure, I cannot say, though I rather doubt it
-- O! no fear of its proving mortal, replied I, men are not so vulnerable in
these days, as they were formerly; the arrow must be tipped with gold, that now
hopes to kill. -- Could you my good friend have added with truth, when kindly
giving him the catalogue of my virtues, that I was also possessed of
considerable fortune; I have the vanity to think, he might have been seriously
wounded; but as it is, be under no apprehensions, depend upon it, his lordship
will recover -- besides, what is to be done with his present flame, Lady
Beningfield? -- nay, cried she, he gave me his honor, the world was wholly
mistaken in regard to that matter -- that she is violently in love with him I
know, from pretty good authority, indeed it is one of those secrets known by the
whole town; but I firmly believe he has no more thoughts of marrying her
Ladyship, than he has of doing me that honor -- well said I, be that as it
will, I am no less certain he will not marry me, and so let the matter rest --
all I entreat, is my dear Mrs. Bellmour, in case he should take it in his head
to mention me again, that you will be cautious; you know I am particularly
circumstanced at present. I wish to avoid making any new acquaintance, till my
brother's return -- and especially under a feigned name.

Thus Harriot have I laid this important business fully before you -- happy was
it, I gave you my opinion of him in my last letter -- were it still to do, you
might fancy the picture a little flattered, in return for the portion he has
bestowed upon me -- adieu, my dear, let me hear from you soon, do not give me
cause to think you more negligent than formerly,

Yours, ever, ISABELLA ROCHLEY.

LETTER the Sixteenth.
Miss LENOX, TO Miss ROCHLEY.
Northampton.
WOULD you believe it, cries my dear Isabella? this lord has actually been
making a thousand impertinent enquiries about me -- no to be sure -- who could
be simple enough to credit so great an improbability -- the story wont go down
with me child.

Isabella, I am more than half out of my wits with joy -- my father knows your
adorer well -- I will not tell you what he says of him, lest you should be out
of your wits too, in case he makes no more inquiries -- why, my dear creature,
he is of all men upon the face of the earth, the very being formed to make a
woman, too happy in al^ conscience -- I die to hear more of him, from you I
mean -- I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep, since I heard of his impertinence.

Mrs. Bellmour behaved like an angel in the affair -- don't be silly Isabella
-- don't play the fool -- there is a medium in all things, one may be over
prudish -- be assured his lordship is a man of real honor, were I not certain
of it, I would blot out the last sentence -- Lady Beningfield will poison you,
beyond a doubt, but that is a trifle -- she is the greatest flirt breathing --
and has made herself tolerably ridiculous about him already; but take my word
for it he will never make himself so by marrying her -- I could treat you with
a bit of scandal, my dear, concerning her ladyship; but it would be thrown away
upon you, as I know you have no taste for it.

Pray how is that miserable wretch Sir John, is he determined to make a die of
it, out of mere spite to your brother? I believe, in my conscience, he will at
least make the utmost of the disaster; though, he may perhaps hesitate a little
about carrying the joke quite so far as death -- do let me hear how things go
on; but above all, tell me, if my lord has had the temmerity to be again
impertinent -- adieu -- I am going a journey of five miles for a dinner; don't
you think I shall have a good appetite? that is one of the many delights of a
country life, -- the carriage is at the door, so fare ye well my Isabella,

Yours, HARRIOT LENOX.

LETTER the Seventeenth.
Miss ROCHLEY, TO Miss LENOX.
London.
IS it possible -- and does your worthy father really know Lord Templeton, and
is he indeed such a prodigy? -- I will not be over prudish, Harriot, and say --
what is all that to me? -- no, I will not; for the truth is, I am exceedingly
glad to hear it in case of accidents -- but before I bestow another line upon
him, let me tell you, I have heard from my dear Orlando twice, since I wrote
last to you -- do not, my dear Harriot, now look stately, and say, I might have
heard ten times instead of twice: -- forgive my too long silence -- I own my
fault, and promise amendment -- he is, thank Heaven! in perfect health and good
spirits; his friend, the General, has promised to represent the affair in its
true colors, and is of opinion, he has nothing to apprehend, should the worst
happen, yet advises him to stay abroad a while, as the safest plan.

I am sorry to tell you, Sir John has had a return of his fever, and is again
thought in danger -- he was so well a few days ago, that I hear they talked of
getting him conveyed, by easy journies to the country; but all thoughts of that
sort are over for the present -- Heaven forbid he should make a die of it, as
you call it -- most unfeignedly would his death be lamented, my dear Harriot!
-- not altogether on his own account indeed; but the consequences would be
fatal to my dear brothers hopes -- however, I would gladly flatter myself, as
he has lived so long after the unfortunate rencontre, he may still get over it.

And now for another line or two about this same lord, my dear -- what he
means, Heaven only knows; but certain it is, he has repeatedly called on Mrs.
Bellmour, imploring her to contrive some way or other for him to see me again
-- this she said, was a favor, she could on no account 'twas a liberty she had
no right to take with Miss Beverley, she was entitled to more respect -- would
she then indulge him so sar, as acquaint him heartily with every particular of
the charming girl's situation? -- no, certainly -- was again her answer, she
had no authority to do it; though, of this be assured, added the worthy woman,
the more your lordship knows of Miss Beverly's character, the more reason you
will have to esteem her, since I can from a thorough knowledge of her, with
truth, declare that beauty, which seems to have made so deep an impression on
your lordship, is her least perfection; I have known her from a child my lord
-- I had the charge of her education, as I believe, I had the honor of telling
you before -- she is descended from one of the most respectable families in the
kingdom -- at least, few can boast of a better -- but will you, my dear Mrs.
Bellmour, said he, only inform me why the lovely creature lives thus retired? I
can meet with no mortal who is acquainted with her, though I have made every
possible enquiry for that purpose, in hopes I might by that means procure the
honor of being properly introduced to her, but all in vain -- this astonishes
me, -- I will freely own to you Mrs. Bellmour, she has made a very serious
impression on me, my heart subscribes to all you have said in her praise, I
have not a doubt of her worth -- are you not cruel then my dear Madam, thus to
deny me an opportunity to be still farther convinced you do her no more than
justice? -- indeed my lord, could I gratify your wishes with propriety, I would
-- I have too good an opinion of you, to believe your intentions are
dishonorable, I will not shock my own feelings so much, as to suppose you
would take this liberty with me if they were -- I can only add, your lordship
must have patience, I trust the time is not far distant, when Miss Beverly will
have a lation with her, to whom your lordship may, without impropriety, apply
for an introduction -- till then, I am persuaded, she will on no account see
any stranger -- a relation? -- yes, my lord, a near one -- and one justly dear
to her, should he have no objections to your lordship's being introduced to
Miss Beverly; I think I may venture to say -- she will have none, as he is well
worthy that deference she ever pays to his judgment.

You alarm me, Mrs. Bellmour -- is this so highly favored relation a young
man? perhaps -- she smiling, replied; he is a young man my lord; but you need
not be so much alarmed, as your expressive, perhaps, implies you are: -- he now
begged she would tell him his name, where he was -- why absent -- when I
expected his return? -- and in short a thousand silly questions of that nature:
but to no purpose.

I had charged her to be cautious, you know, and she was most prudently so --
provokingly so he seemed to think -- and now my dear Harriot, let me know your
thoughts on the matter also -- as for mine, I have not yet been able to bring
them into any sort of order; certain it is, I find his lordship has some times
a share in them; but in so confused a manner, that I can give no account of it
-- it is possible, I may be able to arrange them more methodically by and by --
one sight of him is not quite sufficient for that purpose -- were it consistent
with propriety, I should have no violent objections to take a second view,
particularly after reading the character you give of him; but it certainly is
not, so I must, as Mrs. Bellmour, very wisely advised his lordship to do; wait
till my Orlando's return, they may then adjust all the necessary preleminaries,
in case the wonderful impression my charms have made upon him, should not,
before that time, be worn out, to make room for some other -- Lady Beningfield,
you say, will undoubtedly treat me with a cup of poison, should I rob her of
his heart -- I vow, I never saw a woman, who appears more capable of it, but
that is a trifle, as you say -- and so, my dear Harriot, adieu,

Believe me, Ever yours, ISABELLA ROCHLEY.

LETTER the Eighteenth.
Miss WESTBURY, TO Lady BELL SYDNEY.
I Hoped to have left town before now, my brother was so much better, that the
doctors thought he might be removed without danger, and wished it, as change of
air would have been of service to him -- but his fever is returned with
violence -- Heaven knows what may be the consequence of this relapse.

What a miserable time have I had of it my dear Lady Bell -- and what but a
continuation of misery have I to expect, should he not recover? -- alas! it is
not the loss of him alone I shall have to deplore -- my amiable Rochley ^oo
must be the object of my sorrow, for in that wretched case he never can be mine
-- but let me drop the melancholy subject, it sinks my spirits -- why should I
also sink yours.

You may possibly recollect my telling you, how violently Lord Templeton was
struck with the charms of the elegant creature we saw some time ago at Mrs.
Bellmours -- I was convinced her charms had made a very deep impression -- I
however thought no more of it, till calling one day last week to enquire for my
brother, I saw him -- and by way of a little chat, asked, if he had been so
fortunate as to get another sight of the lovely Miss Beverley? -- I have not,
yet I confess to you Miss Westbury, but I would give half my estate, could I
obtain that happiness -- are you serious my lord? (cried I, quite astonished to
find him so very far gone) -- upon my honor I am, replied he with fervor -- I
never beheld a creature so formed to captivate, she has absolutely robbed me of
my peace -- of your heart that is to say, I presume my lord -- why in fact I
believe the terms on this occasion are synonimous -- yet it is not according to
my ideas of love -- I never till now could persuade myself, that passion could
be excited by beauty alone, and except that she is beautiful as an angel, I
*know little more of her -- but how comes that my lord, surely you might before
now have contrived to learn, whether her mind is as lovely as her person? for
my own part, I confess I have not a doubt of it, for never did I see a
countenance so expressive of every thing that is amiable.

You are mistaken my dear Miss Westbury -- it has been my principal employment
from that time to this, but without success -- the only intelligence I can
gather concerning the charming girl, is from the person of the house where she
resides -- she indeed talks of her in terms of the highest respect, says she
had the charge of her education, has known her from a child, that she is of a
good family -- but I am as great a stranger to her, as to her lovely friend,
all this may be true -- nay* my heart assures me of it -- yet still there is
something misterious -- why this retired life? in so young a person it is
wonderful, and creates a doubt, which I would give world's to have explained,
and to be introduced to her -- this Mrs. Bellmour could certainly do my lord.

Oh, no! this I asked, but was refused -- 'twas a liberty she could not presume
to take, Miss Beverly made a point of seeing no strangers --

It is very odd, said I; yet, certainly, all this my lord is greatly in the the
charming girl's favor -- no doubt of it; she has, it seems, a relation, who is
at present absent, and till his return has reasons for this reserve -- a
relation, my lord -- is it a father, uncle, brother? good Heavens! -- yet it
cannot be -- her name is Beverly -- who is this relation, where is he? -- none
of these particulars could I learn, answered his lordship, except that he is a
young man, and this information I got by mere chance -- but why* my dear Miss
Westbury that exclamation, what if her name was not Beverly? -- O! my lord,
were it not, I could lay my life she is sister to my friend Colonel Rochley --
never did I in any two creatures behold so striking a resemblance -- I could
not refrain from scrutinizing her any more than your lordship; added I,
smiling, though not merely on account of her uncommon beauty, but the
astonishing likeness I found between them -- Ah! would to Heaven, replied he,
your conjecture was true, all my anxiety about what now appears so perplexing,
would instantly vanish my only business, then would be to endeavor to gain her
affections, could I but do that, I should think myself the happiest of men --
fortune is no object to me, to raise an amiable, a deserving woman, to that
rank she is so formed by nature, to adorn, would be the sublimest of all
gratifications -- but it cannot be -- my cruel, my lovely enslavers name is
Beverly -- and I am, really, my dear Miss Westbury, at this moment in a most
painful suspense.

But pray my lord, said I, give me leave to ask what lady Beningfield says to
this new passion? -- she at least would persuade the world, she is sole
mistress of your heart -- upon my honor, replied he, if she is, it is more than
I know; for I can with strict truth declare, I never had an idea of putting it
into her ladyship's possession; nay, I am no less certain it was in my own,
till I beheld the lovely Miss Beverly, from that hour I confess it is rather a
doubt with me, whether it is still in mine or not -- if your lordship was to ask
my opinion of the matter, I should pronounce all doubt out of the question -- I
believe you are right, madam; yet I own, I am unwilling to believe my case,
quite so desperate, till better acquainted with the object of its attachment,
and how to manage that, I cannot for my soul contrive -- I am sorry for it, I
do assure you my lord, for both your sakes. As I own myself so exceedingly
prejudiced in her favor, that I think she must be worthy, even of your
lordship's esteem, and that is saying a great deal -- he gracefully bowed in
return for my compliment, and bid me good morning -- and now my dear lady Bell,
I must wish you good night, I have sat scribbling here till my fingers are
cramped.

Adieu, yours, CAROLINE WESTBURY.

LETTER the Nineteenth.
Miss ROCHLEY, TO Miss LENOX.
London.
MRS. Bellmour came up to me this morning my dear Harriot to ask me a question,
which she was polite enough to say I should absolutely decide as I thought
proper -- it seems, a person to whom she is under some obligations had just
sent to her (knowing her house was spacious and genteel) to ask whether she
could conveniently accommodate a gentleman with an apartment in it for a month
or six weeks, perhaps it might not be lo long, as he was only come to town on
business which might possibly be settled in a shorter time; he wished to be
near this family, who live it seems in the next street, is a man of fortune,
and not young.

How could I, you know my dear Harriot, make any objections, supposing it had
really been disagreeable to me, particularly as she was so good as to put it
upon that footing? -- none in the world, said I, my dear Mrs. Bellmour, I can
have none; had it been a gay young man indeed -- but in that case I well know
that you yourself would have been the first to object, -- most certainly,
replied she, independently my dear Madam of your being in my house; -- and
pray, when is he to come? -- this very evening; he only waits for my answer,
which I could not think of sending till I had mentioned it first to you. -- Be
assured, replied I, I am exceedingly sensible of your very polite attention to
me on this as well as every other occasion -- on this she left me in order to
send an immediate affirmative to her friend; so much for that business.

Now, Harriot, you must know as Lord Templeton and I are not likely to be
farther acquainted, though to say truth, he has done his utmost endeavors
toward it, I have some thoughts of setting my cap at this old neighbor of
mine that is to be, he is it seems a man of fortune, and should* I find it
equal to my ambition, I will give him credit for all other perfections. Are you
not surprised, my dear, to find me in so flippant a humor? I have good reason
-- the vile Sir John is once more pronounced out of danger. -- I may now you
know venture to abuse him a little, though while I believed the wretch dying, I
hope you observed I spared those flattering epithets; he is going to Bristol by
the advice of his physicians -- most heartily do I wish him a speedy recovery,
but speedy or not, my beloved Orlando may now return when he chooses.

I have just dispatched this important intelligence to the dear creature, and
trust it will not now be long ever I shall have the supreme happiness to tell
you that he is safely landed in England, -- you no longer wonder at my spirits
I presume -- I am half, nay more than half out of my wits with joy, and am
determined he shall find me married to this rich old soul on his arrival: it
will be such an agreeable surprise you know, Harriot -- to be sure we shall
rather be hurried in the article of courtship, but as my* consent is ready it is
the less matter, we may make love after we are fettered, since we have not time
for it before, that will be something new, quite out of the common style. --
Poor Lord Templeton, it is really a pity, but there is no help for it, by the by
he does not seem to have given up all hopes -- perhaps, indeed, he has
contracted a habit of calling here in his round of visits, for scarce a day
passes without his asking Mrs. Bellmour how she does, and she says, how I do
also? -- The truth is, he made her very considerable offers, on condition she
would contrive to let him meet me in her company -- bnt she is not the kind of
woman for that purpose, unless convinced beyond a doubt his designs were
honorable.

She has no idea of my submitting to be looked at with a view to see whether he
may happen to approve of me -- this, however, was my way of expressing the
matter, -- marriage, and another pleasant circumstance they say, Harriot, goes
by destiny -- so if it is to be decreed we are to be united in the holy band of
matrimony, the thing will of course come to pass without our troubling our
heads about it; would his Lordship but adopt this doctrine, it would save his
horses a considerable deal of labor. Lady Beningfield also calls here
frequently, though her divine trimming has been finished some time; but she is
an excellent customer to Mrs. Bellmour, yet, the latter suspects jealousy
brings her ladyship as often as business, for she perpetually asks a thousand
ridicuculous questions about me, evidently wishing to find out whether his
lordship has ever seen me again? To this you know Mrs. B. has it in her power
to give a satisfactory answer in the negative, which of course she does, --
happily she does not enquire whether he has made any attempts of that nature,
taking it for granted I suppose if he had, I should have been too much
flattered by so great a distinction to have let him sigh in vain for an
interview. -- Silly creature, she knows but little of your friend if this is
her opinion, -- Adieu, my dear Harriot, let me have your congratulations on the
good news I send you, and believe me as usual most affectionately,

Yours, ISABELLA ROCHLEY

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

