THE DECLINE and FALL OF THE ENGLISH SYSTEM OF FINANCE.

BY THOMAS PAIN, AUTHOR OF COMMON SENSE, AMERICAN CRISIS, AGE OF REASON, etc.

On the verge, nay even in the gulf of Bankruptcy Debates in Parliament.
SECOND AMERICAN EDITION.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY WILLIAM A. DAVIS, FOR J. FELLOWS, From a London Copy of
the Paris Edition.

1796.

THE DECLINE, etc.
NOTHING, they say, is more certain than death, and nothing more uncertain than
the time of dying; yet we can always fix a period beyond which man cannot live,
and within some moments of which he will die. We are enabled to do this, not by
any spirit of prophesy, or foresight into the event, but by observation of what
has happened in all cases of human or animal existence. If then any other
subject, such, for instance, as a system of finance, exhibits in its progress a
series of symptoms indicating decay, its final dissolution is certain, and the
period of it can be calculated from the symptoms it exhibits.

Those who have hitherto written on the English system of finance (the sunding
system) have been uniformly impressed with the idea of its downfall happening
some time or other. They took, however, no data for that opinion, but expressed
it predictively, or merely as opinion, from a conviction that the perpetual
duration of such a system was a natural impossibility. It is in this manner
that Dr. Price has spoken of it; and Smith, in his Wealth of Nations, has
spoken in the same manner; that is, merely as opinion without data. "The
progress," says Smith, of the enormous debts which at present oppress, and will
in the long-run most probably ruin, all the great nations of Europe, (he should
have said governments) has been pretty uniform. But this general manner of
speaking, though it might make some impression, carried with it no conviction.

It is not my intention to predict any thing; but I will show from data already
known, from symptoms and facts which the English funding system has already
exhibited publicly, that it will not continue to the end of Mr. Pitt's life,
supposing him to live the usual life of a man. How much sooner it may fall, I
leave to others to predict.

Let financiers diversify systems of credit as they will, it is nevertheless
true, that every system of credit is a system of paper money. Two experiments
have already been had upon paper money; the one in America, the other in
France. In both those cases the whole capital was emitted, and that whole
capital, which in America was called continental money, and in France
assignats, appeared in circulation; the consequence of which was, that the
quantity became so enormous, and so disproportioned to the quantity of
population, and to the quantity of objects upon which it could be employed,
that the market, if I may so express it, was glutted with it, and the value of
it fell. Between five and six years determined the fate of those experiments.
The same fate would have happened to gold and silver, could gold and silver
have been issued in the same abundant manner as paper had been, and confined in
the country as paper money always is, by having no circulation out of it; or to
speak on a larger scale, the same thing would happen in the world, could the
world be glutted with gold and silver, as America and France has been with
paper.

The English system differs from that of America and France in this one
particular, that its capital is kept out of sight; that is, it does not appear
in circulation. Were the whole capital of the national debt, which at the time
I write this is almost four hundred million pounds sterling, to be emitted in
assignats or bills, and that whole quantity put into circulation, as was done
in America and in France, those English assignats, or bills, would sink in
value as those of America and France have done; and that in a greater degree,
because the quantity of them would be more disproportioned to the quantity of
population in England, than was the case in either of the other two countries.
A nominal pound sterling in such bills would not be worth one penny.

But though the English system, by thus keeping the capital out of sight, is
preserved from hasty destruction, as i^ the case of America and France, it
nevertheless approaches the same fate, and will arrive at it with the same
certainty, though by a slower progress. The difference is altogether in the
degree of speed by which the two systems approach their fate, which, to speak
in round numbers, is as twenty is to one; that is, the English system, that of
funding the capital instead of issuing it, contained within itself a capacity
of enduring twenty times longer than the system adopted by America and France;
and at the end of that time it would arrive at the same common grave, the
Potter's field, of paper money.

The datum, I take for this proportion of twenty to one, is the difference
between a capital and the interest at five per cent. Twenty times the interest
is equal to the capital. The accumulation of paper money in England is in
proportion to the accumulation of the interest upon every new loan; and
therefore the progress to dissolution is twenty times slower than if the
capital were to be emitted and put into circulation immediately. Every twenty
years in the English system is equal to one year in the French and American
systems.

The English funding system began one hundred years ago; in which time there
has been six wars, including the war that ended in 1697.

1. The war that ended, as I have just said, in 1697.

2. The war that began in 1702.

3. The war that began in 1739.

4. The war that began in 1756.

5. The American war, that began in 1775.

6. The present war, that began in 1793.

The national debt, at the conclusion of the war, which ended in 1697, was
twenty-one millions and an half. (See Smith's Wealth of Nations, chapter on
Public Debts.) We now see it approaching fast to four hundred millions. If
between those two extremes of twenty-one millions and four hundred millions,
embracing the several expenses of all the including wars, there exists some
common ratio that will ascertain arithmetically the amount of the debt at the
end of each war, as certainly as the fact is now known to be, that ratio will
in like manner determine what the amount of the debt will be in all future
wars, and will ascertain the period within which the funding system will expire
in a bankruptcy of the government; for the ratio I allude to, is the ratio
which the nature of the thing has established for itself.

Hitherto no idea has been entertained that any such ratio existed, or could
exist, that could determine a problem of this kind, that is, that could
ascertain, without having any knowledge of the fact, what the expense of any
former war had been, or what the expense of any future war would be; but it is,
nevertheless, true that such a ratio does exist, as I shall show, and also the
mode of applying it.

The ratio I allude to is not in Arithmetical progression, like the numbers 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9; nor yet in geometrical progression, like the numbers 2, 4,
8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256: but is in the series of one half upon, each preceding
number; like the numbers 8, 12, 18, 27, 40, 60, 90, 135.

Any person can perceive that the second number, 12, is produced by the
preceding number, 8, and half 8; and that the third number, 18, is in like
manner produced by the preceding number, 12, and half 12; and so on for the
rest. They can also see how rapidly the sums increase as the ratio proceeds.
The difference between the two first numbers is but four; but the difference
between the two last is forty-five: and from thence they may see with what
immense rapidity the national debt has increased, and will continue to
increase, till it exceeds the ordinary powers of calculation, and loses itself
in ciphers.

I come now to apply the ratio as a rule to determine all the cases.

I begin with the war that ended in 1697, which was the war in which the
funding system began. The expense of that war was twenty-one millions and an
half. In order to ascertain the expense of the next war, I add to twenty-one
millions and an half, the half thereof (ten millions and three quarters), which
makes thirty-two millions and a quarter, added to the former debt of twenty-one
millions and an half, carries the national debt to fifty-three millions and
three quarters. Smith, in his chapter on Public Debts, says, Thenational debt
was at this time fifty-three millions.

I proceed to ascertain the expense of the next war, that of 1739, by adding,
as in the former case, one half to the expense of the preceding war. The
expense of the preceding war was thirty-two millions and a quarter: for the
sake of even numbers, say thirty-two millions, the half of which (16) makes
forty-eight millions for the expense of that war.

I proceed to ascertain the expense of the war of 1756, by adding, according to
the ratio, one half to the expense of the preceding war. The expense of the
preceding war was taken at 48 millions, the half of which (24) makes 72
millions for the expense of that war. Smith (chapter on public debts) says, the
expense of the war of 1756 was 72 millions and a quarter.

I proceed to ascertain the expense of the American war, of 1775, by adding, as
in the former cases, one half to the expense of the preceding war. The expense
of the preceding war was 72 millions, the half of which (36) makes 108 millions
for the expense of that war. In the last edition of Smith (chapter on Public
Debts) he says, the expense of the American war was more than an hundred
millions.

I come now to ascertain the expense of the present war, supposing it to
continue as long as former wars have done, and the funding system not to break
up before that period. The expense of the preceding war was 108 millions, he
half of which (54) makes 162 millions for the expense of the present war. It
gives symptoms of going beyond this sum, supposing the funding system not to
break up; for the loans of the last year and of the present year, are
twenty-two millions each, which exceeds the ratio compared with the loans of
the preceding war. It will not be from the inability of procuring loans that
the system will break up. On the contrary, it is the facility with which loans
can be procured, that hastens that event. The loans are altogether paper
transactions, and it is the excess of them that brings on, with the
accelerating speed, that progressive depreciation of funded paper money that
will dissolve the funding system.

I proceed to ascertain the expense of future wars, and I do this merely to
show the impossibility of the continuance of the funding system, and the
certainty of its dissolution.

The expense of the next war after the present war, according to the ratio that
has ascertained the preceding cases will be -- 243 millions Expense of the
second war 364 millions -- third war -- 546 millions -- fourth war -- 819
millions -- fifth war -- 1228 millions -- 3200 millions
which, at only 4 per cent, will require taxes to the nominal amount of one
hundred and twenty-eight millions to pay the annual interest, besides the
interest of the present debt, and the expenses of government, which are not
included on this account. Is there a man so mad, so stupid, as to suppose this
system can continue?

When I first conceived the idea of seeking for some common ratio that should
apply as a rule of measurement to all the cases of the funding system, so far
as to ascertain the several stages of its approach to dissolution, I had no
expectation that any ratio could be found that would apply with so much
exactness as this does. I was led to the idea merely by observing that the
funding system was a thing in continual progression, and that whatever was in a
state of progression might be supposed to admit of, at least, some general
ratio of measurement, that would apply without any very great variation. But
who could have supposed that falling systems, or falling opinions, admitted of
a ratio apparently as true as the descent of falling bodies? I have not made
the ratio, any more than Newton made the ratio of gravitation. I have only
discovered it, and explained the mode of applying it. To show at one view the
rapid progression of the funding system to destruction, and to expose the folly
of those who blindly believe in its continuance, or who artfully endeavor to
impose that belief upon others, I exhibit in the annexed table, the expense of
each of the six wars since the funding system began, as ascertained by the
ratio, and the expense of six wars yet to come, ascertained by the ratio.

First six wars.
1 21 millions 2 33 millions 3 48 millions 4 72 millions The actual expense of
the war of 1739 did not come up to the sum ascertained by the ratio. But as
that which is the natural disposition of a thing, as it is the natural
disposition of a stream of water to descend, will, if impeded in its course,
overcome by a new effort what it had lost by that impediment, so it was with
respect to this war and the next (1756), taken collectively; for the expense of
the war 1756 restored the equilibrium of the ratio, as fully as if it had not
been impeded. A circumstance that serves to prove the truth of the ratio more
fully than if the interruption had not taken place. The war of 1739 was
languid: the efforts were below the value of money at that time: for the ratio
is the measure of the depreciation of money in consequence of the fundding
system; or what comes to the same end, it is the measure of the increase of
paper. Every additional quantity of it, whether in bank notes or otherwise,
diminishes the real, though not the nominal, value of the former quantity.
5 108 millions 6 162 millions -- Total 444 millions Second six wars.
1 243 millions 2 364 millions 3 546 millions 4 819 millions 5 1228 millions 6
1842 millions -- Total 5042 millions

Those who are acquainted with the power with which even a small ratio acting
in progression, multiplies in a long series, will see nothing to wonder at in
this table. Those who are not acquainted with that subject, and not knowing
what else to say may be inclined to deny it. But it is not their opinion one
way, nor mine the other, that can influence the event. The table exhibits the
natural march of the sunding system, to its irredeemable dissolution. Supposing
the present government of England to continue, and to go on as it has gone on
since the funding system began, I would not give twenty shillings for one
hundred pounds in the funds to be paid twenty years hence. I do not speak this
predictively; I produce the data upon which that belief is founded: and which
data it is every body's interest to know, who have any thing to do with the
funds, or who are going to bequeath property to their descendants to be paid at
a future day.

Perhaps it may be asked, that as governments or ministers proceeded by no
ratio in making loans or incurring debts, and as nobody intended any ratio, or
thought of any, how does it happen that there is one? I answer, that the ratio
is founded in necessity; and I now go to explain what that necessity is.

It will always happen, that the price of labor, or of the produce of labor,
be that produce what it may, will be in proportion to the quantity of money in
a country, admitting things to take their natural course. Before the invention
of the funding system, there was no other money than gold and silver; and as
nature gives out those metals with a sparing hand, and in regular annual
quantities from the mines, the several prices of things were proportioned to
the quantity of money at that time, and so nearly stationary as to vary but
little in any fifty or sixty years of that period.

When the funding system began, a substitute for gold and silver began also.
That substitute was paper; and the quantity of it increased as the quantity of
interest increased upon accumulated loans. This appearance of a new and
additional species of money in the nation soon began to break the relative
value which money and the things it will purchase bore to each other before.
Every thing rose in price, but the rise at first was little and slow, like the
difference in units between the two first numbers, 8 and 12, compared with the
two last numbers, 90, and 135, in the table. It was however sufficient to make
itself considerably felt in a large transaction. When therefore government, by
engaging in a new war, required a new loan, it was obliged to make a higher
loan than the former loan to balance the increased price to which things had
risen; and as that new loan increased the quantity of paper in proportion to
the new quantity of interest, it carried the price of things still higher than
before.

The next loan was again higher, to balance that further increased price; and
all this in the same manner, though not in the same degree, that every new
emission of continental money in America, or of assignats in France, were
greater than the preceding emission, to make head against the advance of
prices, till the combat could be contained no longer. Herein is founded the
necessity of which I have just spoken. That necessity proceeds with
accelerating velocity, and the ratio I have laid down is the measure of that
acceleration; or to speak the technical language of the subject, it is the
measure of the increasing depreciation of funded paper money, and of bank-notes
continues to multiply. What else but this can account for the difference
between one war's costing 21 millions, and another war's costing 160 millions?

The difference cannot be accounted for on the score of extraordinary efforts,
or extraordinary achievements. The war that cost 21 millions, was the war of
the confederates, historically called the grand alliance, consisting of
England, Austria, and Holland, in the time of William the Third, against Louis
the Fourteenth, and in which the confederates were victorious. The present is a
war of much greater confederacy -- a confederacy of England, Austria, Prussia,
the German Empire, Spain, Holland, Naples, and Sardinia, eight powers against
the French Republic singly, and the Republic has beaten the whole confederacy.
But to return to my subject --

It is said in England, that the value of paper keeps equal with the value of
gold and silver. But the case is not rightly stated; for the fact is, that the
paper has pulled down the value of gold and silver to a level with itself. Gold
and silver will not purchase so much of any purchasable article at this day as
if no paper had appeared, nor so much as it will in any country in Europe where
there is no paper. How long this hanging together of money and paper will
continue makes a new case; because it daily exposes the system to sudden death,
independent of the natural death it would otherwise suffer.

I consider the funding system as being now advanced into the last twenty years
of its existence. The single circumstance were there no other, that a war
should cost nominally one hundred and sixty millions which when the system
began cost but twenty-one millions, or that the loan for one year only,
(including the loan to the Emperor) should now be nominally greater than the
whole expense of that war, shows the state of depriciation to which the funding
system has arrived. Its depreciation is in the proportion of eight for one,
compared with the value of its money when the system began; which is the state
the French assignats stood in a year ago (March, 1795), compared with gold and
silver. It is therefore that I say, that the English funding system, has
entered into the last twenty years of its existence. Comparing each twenty
years of the English system with every single year of the American and French
systems, as before stated.

Again, supposing the present war to close as former wars have done, and
without producing either revolution or reform in England, another war at least
must be looked for in the space of the twenty years I allude to; for it has
never yet happened that twenty years have passed off without a war, and that
more especially since the English government has dabbled in German politics,
and shown a disposition to insult the world, and the world of commerce, with
her navy. That next war will carry the national debt to very nearly seven
hundred millions, the interest of which, at four per cent. will be twenty-eight
millions, besides the taxes for the (then) expenses of government, which will
increase in the same proportion, and which will carry the taxes to at least 40
millions: and if another war only begins, it will quickly carry them to above
fifty; for it is in the last twenty years of the funding system, as in the last
year of the American and French systems without funding, that all the great
shocks begin to operate.

I have just mentioned that paper, in England, has pulled down the value of
gold and silver to a level with itself; and that this pulling down of gold and
silver money has created the appearance of paper money's keeping up. The same
thing, and the same mistake, took place in America and in France, and continued
for a considerable time after the commencment of their system of paper; and the
actual depreciation of money was hidden under that mistake.

It was said in America, at that time, that every thing was becoming dear; but
gold and silver could then buy those dear articles no cheaper than paper could;
and therefore it was not called depreciation. The idea of dearness established
itself for the idea of depreciation. The same was the case in France. Though
every thing rose in price soon after assignats appeared, yet those dear
articles could be purchased no cheaper with gold and silver than with paper,
and it was only said that things were dear. The same is still the language in
England. They call it dearness. but they will soon find that it is an actual
depreciation, and that this depreciation is the effect of the funding system;
which, by crowding such a continually increasing mass of paper into
circulation, carries down the value of gold and silver with it. But gold and
silver will, in the long run, revolt against depreciation, and separate from
the value of paper; for the progress of all such systems appears to be, that
the paper will take the command in the beginning, and gold and silver in the
end.

But this succession in the command of gold and silver over paper, makes a
crisis far more eventful to the funding system than to any other system upon
which paper can be issued; for, strictly speaking, it is not a crisis of
danger, but a symptom of death. It is a death stroke to the funding system. It
is a revolution in the whole of its affairs.

If paper be issued without being funded upon interest, emissions of it cannot
be continued after the value of it separates from gold and silver, as we have
seen in the two cases of America and France. But the funding system rests
altogether upon the value of paper being equal to gold and silver; which will
be as long as the paper can continue carrying down the value of gold and silver
to the same level to which itself descends, and no longer. But even in this
state, that of descending equally together, the minister, whoever he may be,
will find himself beset with accumulating difficulties; because the loans and
taxes voted for the service of each ensuing year will wither in his hands
before the year expires, or before they can be applied. This will force him to
have recourse to emissions of what are called exchequer and navy bills, which,
by still increasing the mass of paper in circulation, will drive on the
depreciation still more rapidly.

It ought to be known that taxes in England are not paid in gold and silver,
but in paper (bank notes). Every person who pays any considerable quantity of
taxes, such as malsters, brewers, distillers (I appeal for the truth of it to
any of the collectors of excise in England, or to Mr. Whitbread), knows this to
be the case. There is not gold and silver enough in the nation to pay the taxes
in coin, as I shall show; and consequently there is not money enough in the
bank to pay the notes. The interest of the national funded debt is paid at the
bank in the same kind of paper in which the taxes are collected. When people
find, as they will find a reservedness among each other in giving gold and
silver for bank notes, or the least preference for the former over the latter,
they will go for payment to the bank, where they have a right to go. They will
do this as a measure of prudence, each one for himself, and the truth or
delusion of the funding system will then be proved.

I have said in the foregoing paragraph, that there is not gold and silver
enough in the nation to pay the taxes in coin, and consequently, that there
cannot be enough in the bank to pay the notes. As I do not choose to rest any
thing upon assertion, I appeal for the truth of this to the publications of Mr.
Eden (now called Lord Aukland), and George Chalmers, Secretary to the Board of
Trade and Plantation, of which Jenkinson (now called Lord Hawkesbury) is
president. [These sort of folks change their names so often, that it is as
difficult to know them as it is to know a thief.] Chalmers gives the quantity
of gold and silver coin from the returns of coinage at the mint; and, after
deducting for the light gold recoined, says, that the amount of gold and silver
coin is about twenty millions. He had better not have proved this, especially
if he had reflected, that, public credit is suspicion asleep. The quantity is
much too little.

Of this twenty millions (which is not a fourth part of the quantity of gold
and silver there is in France, as is shown in Mr. Neckar's Treatise on the
Administration of the Finances) three millions at least must be supposed to be
in Ireland some in Scotland, and in the West Indies, Newfoundland, etc. The
quantity therefore in England cannot be more than sixteen millions, which is
four millions less than the amount of the taxes. But admitting there to be
sixteen millions, not more than a fourth part thereof (four millions) can be in
London, when it is considered that every city, town, village, and farm-house in
the nation must have a part of it, and that all the great manufactories, which
most require cash, are out of London. Of this four millions in London, every
banker, merchant, tradesman, in short, every individual must have some. He must
be a poor shopkeeper indeed, who has not a few guineas in his till. The
quantity of cash therefore in the bank can never, on the evidence of
circumstances, be so much as two millions; most probably not more than one
million; and on this slender twig, always liable to be broken, hangs the whole
funding system of four hundred millions, besides many millions in bank notes.
The sum in the bank is not sufficient to pay one fourth of only one years
interest of the national debt, were the creditors to demand payment in cash, or
to demand cash for the bank notes in which the interest is paid. A circumstance
always liable to happen.

One of the amusements that has kept up the farce of the funding system, is,
that the interest is regularly paid. But as the interest is always paid in bank
notes, and as bank notes can always be coined for the purpose, this mode of
payment proves nothing. The point of proof is, can the bank give cash for the
bank notes on which the interest is paid? If it can not, and it is evident it
cannot, some milmillions of bank notes must go without payment, and those
holders of bank notes who apply last will be worst off. When the present
quantity of cash in the bank be paid away, it is next to impossible to see how
any new quantity is to arrive. None will arrive from taxes, for the taxes will
all be paid in bank notes; and should the government refuse bank notes in
payment of taxes, the credit of bank notes will be gone at once. No cash will
arrive from the business of discounting merchants bills, for every merchant
will pay off those bills in bank notes, and not in cash. There is therefore no
means left for the bank to obtain a new supply of cash after the present
quantity be paid away. But, besides the impossibility of paying the interest of
the funded debt in cash, there are many thousand persons in London and in the
country, who are holders of bank notes that came into their hands in the fair
way of trade, and who are not stock holders in the sunds; and as such persons
have had no hand in increasing the demand upon the bank, as those have had,
who, for their own private interest, like Boyd and others, are contracting, or
pretending to contract, for new loans, they will conceive they have a just
right their bank notes should be paid first. Boyd has been very sly in France,
in changing his paper into cash. He will be just as sly in doing the same thing
in London; for he has learned to calculate: and then it is probable he will set
off for America.

A stoppage of payment at the bank is not a new thing. Smith, in his Wealth of
Nations, book 2, chap. 2, says, that in the year 1696, exchequer bills fell
forty, fifty, and sixty per cent. bank notes twenty per cent. and the bank
stopped payment. -- That which happened in 1696, may happen again in 1796. The
period in which it happened was the last year of the war of king William. It
necessarily put a stop to the further emission of exchequer and navy bills, and
to the raising of new loans; and the peace which took place the next year was
probably hurried on by this circumstance, and saved the bank from bankruptcy.
Smith, in speaking of the circumstances of the bank, upon another occasion,
says, (book 2, chap. 2,) -- This great company has been reduced to the
necessity of paying in sixpences. When a bank adopts the expedient of paying in
sixpences, it is a confession of insolvency.

It is worthy of observation, that every case of failure in finances, since the
system of paper began, has produced a revolution in governments, either total
or partial. A failure in the finances of France produced the French revolution.
A failure in the finance of assignats, broke up the revolutionary government,
and produced the present French Constitution. A failure in the finances of the
old Congress of America, and the embarrassments it brought upon commerce, broke
up the system of the old confederation, and produced the present federal
constitution. If then we admit of reasoning by comparison of causes and events
a failure in the English finances will produce some change in the government of
that country.

As to Mr. Pitt's project of paying off the national debt by applying a million
a year for that purpose, while he continues adding more than twenty millions a
year to it, it is like setting a man with a wooden leg to run after a hare. The
longer he runs the farther he is off.

When I said that the funding system had entered the last twenty years of its
existence, I certainly did not mean that it would continue twenty years and
then expire as a lease would do. I meant to describe that age of decripitude in
which death is every day expected, and life cannot continue long. But the death
of credit, or that state that is called bankruptcy, is not always marked by
those progressive stages of visible decline, that mark the decline of natural
life. In the progression of nautral life, age annot counterfeit youth nor
conceal the departure of juvenile abilities. But it is otherwise with respect
to the death of credit; for though all the approaches to bankruptcy may
actually exist in circumstances, they admit of being concealed by appearances.
Nothing is more common than to see the bankrupt of today a man in credit but
the day before; yet no sooner is the real state of his affairs known than every
body can see he had been insolvent long before. In London the greatest theater
of bankruptcy in Europe, this part of the subject will be well and feelingly
understood.

Mr. Pit continually talks of credit, and of the national resources. These are
two of the feigned appearances by which the approaches to bankruptcy are
concealed. That which he calls credit may exist as I have just shown, in a
state of insolvency and is always what I have before described it to be,
suspicion asleep.

As to national resources, Mr. Pit, like all the English financiers that
preceded him since the funding system began, has uniformly mistaken the nature
of a resource: that is, they have mistaken it consistently with the delusion of
the funding system; but time is explaining the delusion. That which he calls,
and which they called, a resource, is not a resource, but it is the
anticipation of a resource. They have anticipated what would have been a
resource in another generation, had not the use of it been so anticipated. The
funding system is a system of anticipation. Those who established it an hundred
years ago, anticipated the resources of those who were to live an hundred years
after; for the people of the present day have to pay the interest of the debts
contracted at that time, and of all debts contracted since. But it is the last
feather that breaks the horse's back. Had the system began an hundred years
before, the amount of taxes at this time to pay the annual interest at four per
cent. (could we suppose such a system of insanity could have continued) would
be two hundred and twenty millions annually; for the capital of the debt would
be 54886 millions, according to the ratio that ascertains the expense of the
wars for the hundred years that are past. But long before it could have reached
this period, the value of bank notes, from the immense quantity of them, (for
it is in paper only that such a nominal revenue could be collected) would have
been as low or lower than continental paper money has been in America, or
assignats in France; and as to the idea of exchanging them for gold and silver,
it is too absurd to be contradicted.

Do we not see that nature in all her operations, disowns the visionary basis
upon which the funding system is built? She acts always by renewed successions,
and never by accumulating additions perpetually progressing. Animals and
vegetables, men and trees, have existed ever since the world began; but that
existence has been carried on by successions of generations, and not by
continuing the same men and the same trees in existence that existed first; and
to make room for the new she removes the old. Every natural idiot can see this.
It is the stock-jobbing idiot only that mistakes. He has conceived that art can
do what nature cannot. He is teaching her a new system -- that there is not
occasion for men to die -- That the scheme of creation can be carried on upon
the plan of the funding system -- That it can proceed by continual additions of
new beings, like new loans, and all live together in eternal youth. Go, count
the graves, thou idiot, and learn the folly of thy arithmetic.

But besides these things, there is something visibly farcical in the whole
operation of loaning. It is scarcely more than four years ago that such a rot
of bankruptcy spread itself over London, that the whole commercial fabric
tottered; trade and credit were at a stand; and such was the state of things,
that to prevent, or suspend, a general bankruptcy, the government lent the
merchants six millions in government paper, and now the merchants lend the
government twenty two millions in their paper; and two parties, Boyd and
Morgan, men but little known, contend who shall be the lenders. What a farce is
this! It reduces the operation of loaning to accommodation paper, in which the
competitors contend, not who shall lend but who shall sign, because there is
something to be got for signing.

Every English stock-jobber and minister boasts of the credit of England. Its
credit, say they, is greater than that of any country in Europe. There is a
good reason for this; for there is not another country in Europe that could be
made the dupe of such a delusion. The English funding system will remain a
monument of wonder, not so much on account of the extent to which it has been
carried, as of the folly of believing in it.

Those who had formerly predicted that the funding system would break up when
the debt should amount to one hundred or one hundred and fifty millions, erred
only in not distinguishing between insolvency and actual bankruptcy; for the
insolvency commenced as soon as the government became unable to pay the
interest in cash, or to give cash for the bank notes in which the interest was
paid, whether that inability was known or not, or whether it was suspected or
not. Insolvency always takes place before bankruptcy; for bankruptcy is nothing
more than the publication of that insolvency. In the affairs of an individual,
it often happens that insolvency exists several years before bankruptcy, and
that the insolvency is concealed and carried on till the individual is not able
to pay one shilling in the pound. A government can ward off bankruptcy longer
than an individual; but insolvency will inevitably produce bankruptcy, whether
in an individual or in a government. If then the quantity of bank notes payable
on demand, which the bank has issued, are greater than the bank can pay off,
the bank is insolvent; and when that insolvency be declared, it is bankruptcy.

Among the delusions that have been imposed upon the nation by ministers, to
give a false coloring to its affairs, and by none more than by Mr. Pit, is a
motley, amphibious charactered thing called the balance of trade. This balance
of trade, as it is called, is taken from the custom-house books, in which
entries are made of all cargoes exported, and also of all cargoes imported, in
each year; and when the value of the exports, according to the price set upon
them by the exporter or by the custom-house, is greater than the value of the
imports, estimated in the same manner they say, the balance of trade, is so
much in their favor.

The custom-house books prove regularly enough that so many cargoes have been
exported, and so many imported; but this is all that they prove, or were
intended to prove. They have nothing to do with the balance of profit or loss;
and it is ignorance to appeal to them upon that account; for the case is, that
the greater the loss is in any one year, the higher will this thing called the
balance of trade appear to be, according to the custom-house books. For
example, nearly the whole of the Mediterranean convoy was taken by the French
this year; consequently those cargoes will not appear as imports on the
custom-house books, and therefore the balance of trade, by which they mean the
profits of it, will appear to be so much the greater as the loss amounts to;
and, on the other hand, had the loss not happened, the profits would have
appeared to have been so much the less. All the losses happening at sea to
returning cargoes, by accidents, by the elements, or by capture, make the
balance appear the higher on the side of the exports; and were they all lost at
sea, it would appear to be all profit on the custom-house books. Also every
cargo of exports that is lost that occasions another to be sent, adds in like
manner, to the side of the exports, and appears as profit. This year the
balance of trade will appear high, because the losses have been great by
capture and by storms. The ignorance of the British Parliament, in listening to
this hackneyed imposition of ministers about the balance of trade, is
astonishing. It shows how little they know of national affairs; and Mr. Gray
may as well talk Greek to them, as make motions about the state of the nation.
They understand fox-hunting and the game-laws.


I come now to show the several ways by which bank notes get into circulation.
I shall afterward offer an estimate on the total quantity or amount of bank
notes existing at this moment.

The bank acts in three capacities. As a bank of discount; as a bank of
deposit; and as banker for the government.

First as bank of discount. The bank discounts merchants bills of exchange for
two months. When a merchant has a bill that will become due at the end of two
months, and wants payment before that time, that bank advances that payment to
him, deducting therefrom at the rate of five per cent. per ann. The bill of
exchange remains at the bank as a pledge or pawn, and at the end of two months
it must be redeemed. This transaction is done altogether in paper; for the
profits of the bank, as a bank of discount, arise entirely from its making use
of paper as money. The bank gives bank notes to the merchant in discounting the
bill of exchange, and the redeemer of the bill pays bank notes to the bank in
redeeming it. It very seldom happens that the real money passes between them.

If the profits of a bank be, for example, two hundred thousand pounds a year
(a great sum to be made merely by exchanging one sort of paper for another, and
which shows also that the merchants of that place are pressed for money for
payments, instead of having money to spare to lend to government,) it proves
that the bank discounts to the amount annually, or 666,666l. every two months;
and there never remains in the bank more than two months pledge, of the value
of 666,666l. at any one time, the amount of bank notes in circulation at any
one time should not be more than to that amount. This is sufficient to show
that the present immense quantity of bank notes, which are distributed through
every city, town, village, and farm-house in England, cannot be accounted for
on the score of discounting.

Secondly, as a bank of deposit. To deposit money at the bank means to lodge it
there for the sake of convenience, and to be drawn out at any moment the
depositer pleases, or to be paid away to his order. When the business of
discounting is great, that of depositing is necessarily small. No man deposits
and applies for discount at the same time; for it would be like paying interest
for lending money, instead of for borrowing it. The deposits that are now made
at the bank are almost entirely in bank notes, and consequently they add
nothing to the ability off the bank to pay of the bank notes that may be
presented for payment; and besides this, the deposits are no more the property
of the bank than the cash or bank notes in a merchant's counting house are the
property of his book-keeper. No great increase therefore of bank notes, beyond
what the discounting business admits, can be accounted for on the score of
deposits.

Thirdly. The bank acts as banker for the government. This is the connection
that threatens ruin to every public bank. It is through this connection that
the credit of a bank is forced far beyond what it ought to be, and still
further beyond its ability to pay. It is through this connection that such an
immense redundant quantity of bank notes have gotten into circulation; and
which, instead of being issued because there was property in the bank, have
been issued because there was none.

When the treasury is empty, which happens in almost every year of every war,
its coffers at the bank are empty also. It is in this condition of emptiness
that the minister has recourse to emissions of wh^t are called exchequer and
navy bills, which continually generates a new increase of bank notes, and which
are sported upon the public without there being property in the bank to pay
them. -- These exchequer and navy bills (being, as I have said, emitted because
the treasury and its coffers at the bank are empty and cannot pay the demands
that come in) are no other than an acknowledgement that the bearer is entitled
to receive so much money. They may be compared to the settlement of an account,
in which the debtor acknowledges the balance he owes, and for which he gives a
note of hand, or to a note of hand given to raise money upon it.

Sometimes the bank discounts those bills as it would discount merchants bills
of exchange; sometimes it purchases them of the holders at the current price;
and sometimes it agrees with the minister to pay an interest upon them to the
holders, and keep them in circulation. In every one of those cases an
additional quantity of bank notes get into circulation, and are sported, as I
have said, upon the public, without there being property in the bank, as banker
for the government, to pay them: and besides this, the bank has now no money of
its own; for the money that was originally subscribed to begin the the credit
of the bank which at its first establishment, has been lent to government, and
wasted long ago.

The bank (says Smith, book 2, chap. 2,) acts not only as an ordinary bank, but
as a great engine of state; it receives and pays the greater part of the
annuities which are due to the creditors of the public. (It is worth observing,
that the public, or the nation, is always put for the government in speaking of
debts.) It circulates (says Smith) exchequer bills, and it advances to
government the annual amount of the land and malt taxes which are frequently
not paid till several years afterward. (This advancement is also done in
banknotes, for which there is not property in the bank.) In those different
operations, (says Smith) its duty to the public may sometimes have obliged it,
without any fault of its directors, to over stock the circulation with paper
money, bank notes. How its duty to the public can induce it to over stock that
public with promissory bank notes which it cannot pay, and thereby expose the
individuals of that public to ruin, is too paradoxical to be explained; for it
is on the credit which individuals give to the bank, by receiving and
circulating its notes, and not upon its own credit or its own property, for it
has none that the bank sports. If however it be the duty of the bank to expose
the public to this hazard, it is at least equally the duty of the individuals
of that public to get their money and take care of themselves; and leave it to
placemen, pensioners, government contractors, Reeves's association, and the
members of both houses of Parliment, who have voted away the money at the nod
of the minister, to continue the credit if they can, and for which their
estates individually and collectively ought to answer as far as they will go.

There has always existed, and still exists, a mysterious, suspicious
connection, between the minister and the directors of the bank, and which
explains itself no otherways than by a continual increase of bank notes.
Without, therefore, entering into any further details of the various
contrivances by which bank notes are issued, and thrown upon the public, I
proceed, as I before mentioned, to offer an estimate on the total quantity of
bank notes in circulation.

However disposed governments may be to wring money by taxes from the people,
there is a limit to the practice established in the nature of things. That
limit is the proportion between the quantity of money in a nation, be that
quantity what it may, and the greatest quantity of taxes that can be raised
upon it. People have other uses for money besides paying taxes; and it is only
a proportional part of that money they can spare for taxes, as it is only a
proportional part they can spare for house-rent, for clothing, or for any other
particular use. These proportions find out and establish themselves; and that
with such exactness, that if any one part exceeds its proportion, all the other
parts ^eel it.

Before the invention of paper money (bank notes), there was no other money in
the nation than gold and silver, and the greatest quantity of money that ever
was raised in taxes during that period, never exceeded a fourth part of the
quantity of money in the nation. It was high taxing when it came to this point.
The taxes in the time of William the Third never reached to four millions
before the invention of paper, and the quantity of money in the nation at that
time was estimated to be about sixteen millions. The same proportions
established themselves in France. There was no paper money in France before the
present revolution, and the taxes were collected in gold and silver money. The
highest quantity of taxes never exceeded twenty-two millions sterling; and the
quantity of gold and silver money in the nation at the same time, as stated by
Mr. Neckar, from returns of coinage at the mints, in his Treatise on the
Administration of the Finances, was about ninety millions sterling. To go
beyond this limit of a fourth part, in England, they were obliged to introduce
paper money; and the attempt to go beyond it in France, where paper could not
be introduced broke up the government, This proportion therefore of a fourth
part, is the limit which the nature of the thing establishes for itself, be the
quantity of money in a nation more or less.

The amount of taxes in England at this time is full twenty millions: and
therefore the quantity of gold and silver, and of bank notes, taken together,
amounts to eighty millions. The quantity of gold and silver, as stated by Lord
Hawkesbury's secretary, (George Chalmers), as I have before shown, is twenty
millions; and therefore the total amount of bank notes in circulation, all made
payable on demand, is sixty millions. This enormous sum will astonish the most
stupid stock-jobber, and overpower the credulity of the most thoughtless
Englishman: but were it only a third of that sum, the bank cannot pay half a
crown in a pound.

There is something curious in the movements of this modern complicated
machine, the funding system; and it is only now that it is beginning to unfold
the full extent of its movements. In the first part of its movements it gives
great powers into the hands of government, and in the last part it takes them
completely away.

The funding system set out with raising revenues under the name of loans, by
means of which government became both prodigal and powerful. The loaners
assumed the name of creditors, and though it was soon discovered that loaning
was government-jobbing, those pretended loaners, or the persons who purchased
into the funds afterward, conceived themselves not only to be creditors, but
to be the only creditors.

But such has been the operation of this complicated machine, the funding
system, that it has produced, unperceived, a second generation of creditors,
more numerous and far more formidable, and withal more real than the first
generation; for every holder of a bank note is a creditor, and a real creditor,
and the debt due to him is made payable on demand. The debt therefore which the
government owes to individuals is composed of two parts; the one about four
hundred millions bearing interest, the other about sixty millions payable on
demand. The one is called the funded debt, the other is the debt due in bank
notes.

This second debt (that contained in the bank notes) has, in a great measure,
been incurred to pay the interest of the first debt; so that in fact little or
no real interest has been paid by government. The whole has been delusion and
fraud. Government first contracted a debt in the form of loans with one class
of people, and then run clandestinely into debt with another class, by means of
bank notes, to pay the interest. Government acted of itself in contracting the
first debt, and made a machine of the bank to contract the second.

It is this second debt that changes the seat of power and the order of things;
for it puts it in the power of even a small part of the holders of bank notes
(had they no other motive than disgust at Pit and Greenville's sedition bills
to control any measure of government they found to be injurious to their
interest; and that not by popular meetings, or popular societies, but by the
simple and easy opera^^on of withholding their credit from that government;
that is, by individually demanding payment at the bank for every bank note that
comes into their hands. Why should Pit and Greenville expect that the very men
whom they insult and injure should at the same time continue to support the
measure of Pit and Greenville, by giving credit to their promissory notes of
payment? No new emissions of bank notes could go on while payment was demanding
on the old and the cash in the bank wasting daily away; nor any new advances be
made to government or to the emperor to carry on the war; nor any new emission
be made of exchequer bills.

"The bank," says Smith, (book ii. chapter 2.) "is a great engine of state." And in
the same paragraph he says, "The stability of the bank is equal to that of the
British government;" which is the same as to say that the stability of the
government is equal to that of the bank, and no more. If then the bank cannot
pay, the archtreasurer of the holy Roman empire) S. R. I. A. Part of the
inscription on an English guinea.
) is a bankrupt. When folly invented vented titles, she did not attend to their
application; for ever since the government of England has been in the hands of
arch-treasurers, it has been running into bankrupty; and as to the
arch-treasurer apparent, he has been a bankrupt long ago. What a miserable
prospect has England before its eyes!

Before the war of 1755 there were no bank notes lower than twenty pounds.
During that war bank notes of fifteen pounds and of ten pounds were coined; and
now, since the commencement of the present war, they are coined as low as five
pounds. These five pound notes will circulate chiefly among little
shopkeepers, butchers, bakers, market people, renters of small houses,
lodgers, etc. All the high departments of commerce, and the affluent stations
of life were already over-stocked, as Smith expresses it, with the bank notes.
No place remained open wherein to crowd an additional quantity of bank notes
but among the class of people I have just mentioned, and the means of doing
this could be best affected by coming five pound notes. This conduct has the
appearance of that of an unprincipled insolvent, who, when on the verge of
bankruptcy to the amount of many thousands, will borrow as low as five pounds
of the servants in his house, and break the next day.

But whatever momentary relief or aid the minister and his bank might expect
from this low contrivance of five pound notes, it will increase the inability
of the bank to pay the higher notes, and hasten the destruction of all; for
even the small taxes that used to be paid in money will now be paid in those
notes, and the bank will soon find itself with scarcely any other money than
what the hair powder guinea tax brings in.

The bank notes make the most serious part of the business of finance; what is
called the national funded debt is but a trifle when put in comparison with it;
yet the case of the bank notes has never been touched upon. But it certainly
ought to be known upon what authority, whether that of the minister or of the
directors, and upon what foundation, such immense quantities are issued. I have
stated the amount of them at sixty millions sterling: I have produced data for
that estimation; and besides this, the apparent quantity of them, far beyond
that of gold and silver in the nation, corroborates therewith. But were there
but a third part of sixty millions, the bank cannot pay half a crown in the
pound; for no new supply of money as before said, can arrive at the bank, as
all the taxes will be paid in paper.

When the funding system began, it was not doubted that the loans that had been
borrowed would be repaid. Covernment not only propagated that belief, but it
began paying them off. In time this profession came to be abandoned; and it is
not difficult to see that bank notes will march the same way; for the amount of
them is only another debt under another name; and the probability is that Mr.
Pit will at last propose funding them. In that case bank notes will not be so
valuable as French assignats. The assignats have a solid property in reserve in
the national domains; bank notes have none; and besides this, the English
revenue must then sink down to what the amount of it was before the funding
system began; between three and four millions. One of which the arch-treasurer
would require for himself, and the archtreasurer apparent would require three
quarters of a million more to pay his debts. "In France," says Stern, they
order these things better.

I have now exposed the English system of finance to the eyes of all nations.
In doing this, I have done an act of justice to those numerous citizens of
neutral nations who have been imposed upon by that fraudulent system, and who
have property at stake upon the event.

As an individual citizen of America, and as far as an individual can go, I
have revenged (if I may use the expression without any immoral meaning) the
piratical depredations committed on the American commerce by the English
government. I have retaliated for France on the subject of finance; and I
conclude with retorting on Mr. Pit the expression he used against France, and
say, that the English system of finance is on the verge, nay, even in the gulf
of bankruptcy.

THOMAS PAIN.
Paris, Germinal 9th, 4th year. April 8, 1796.
FINIS.
NEW PUBLICATIONS, FOR SALE BY JOHN FELLOWS, No. 60, Wall-Street.
THE first Principles of Government, by Thomas Pain: To which is added, his
Speech, delivered in the Convention, July 7, 1795, on the Declaration of Rights
and the Constitution. 12 cents. The Ruins, or a Survey of the Revolutions of
Empires, by Volney. 1 dollar. The Principles, History and Use of Balloons;
extracted chiefly from the Encyclopedia: To which is added, a Prospectus of
Messrs. Blanchard and Baker's intended Voyage from New York. 25 cents.
Hasty-Pudding, a Poem. 12 cents. A general View of the Arguments for the Unity
of God, and against the Divinity and pre-existence of Christ; from Reason, from
the Scriptures, and from History, by Joseph Priestly. 12 cents. Philosophical
Dictionary, by Voltaire. 1 dollar.
IN THE PRESS,
A History of the Progress of the Human Mind, by Cearitat de Condorcet. 1
dollar to subscribers. Joel Barlow's Political Writings. The Life of James
Lackington.

