DISSERTATIONS ON GOVERNMENT, THE AFFAIRS OF THE BANK, AND PAPER-MONEY.

By the Author of COMMON SENSE.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by CHARLES CIST, at the Corner of Fourth and
Arch-streets.

And sold by Messrs. HALL and SELLERS, ROBERT AITKEN and WILLIAM PRICHARD in
Market-street.

M,DCC,LXXXVI.

PREFACE.
I HERE present the Public with a new performance. Some parts of it are more
particularly adapted to the State of Pennsylvania, on the present state of its
affairs: But there are others which are on a larger scale. The time bestowed on
this work has not been long, the whole of it being written and printed during
the short recess of the Assembly.

As to parties, merely considered as such, I am attached to no particular one.
There are such things as right and wrong in the world, and so far as these are
parties against each other, the signature of COMMON SENSE is properly employed.

THOMAS PAIN.
Philadelphia, Feb. 18, 1786.
(...)of such powers only as are constituent parts of the government, not of
those powers which are externally applied to resist and overturn it.

IN Republics, such as those established in America, the sovereign power, or
the power over which there is no control and which controuls all others,
remains where nature placed it; in the people; for the people in America are
the fountain of power. It remains there as a matter of right, recognized in the
constitutions of the country, and the exercise of it is constitutional and
legal. -- This sovereignty is exercised in electing and deputing a certain
number of persons to represent and act for the whole, and who, if they do not
act right, may be displaced by the same power that placed them there, and
others elected and deputed in their stead, and the wrong measures of former
representatives corrected and brought right by this means. Therefore the
republican form and principle leaves no room for insurrection, because it
provides and establishes a rightful means in its stead.

IN countries under a despotic form of government, the exercise of this power
is an assumption of sovereignty; a wresting it from the person in whose hand
their form of government has placed it, and the exercise of it there is styled
rebellion. Therefore the despotic form of government knows no intermediate
space between being slaves and being rebels.

I shall in this place offer an observation which, though not immediately
connected with my subject, is very naturally deduced from it, which is, That
the nature, if I may so call it, of a government over any people may be
ascertained from the modes which the people pursue to obtain redress; for like
causes will produce like effects. And therefore the government which Britain
attempted to erect over America could be no other than a despotism, because it
left to the Americans no other modes of redress than those which are left to
people under despotic governments, petition and resistance: and the Americans,
without ever attending to a comparison on the case, went into the same steps
which such people go into, because no other could be pursued: and this
similarity of effects leads up to, and ascertains, the similarity of the causes
or governments which produced them.

BUT to return. -- The repository where the sovereign power is placed is the
first criterion of distinction between a country under a despotic form of
government and a free country. In a country under a despotic government, the
sovereign is the only free man in it. -- In a republic, the people retaining
the sovereignty in themselves, naturally and necessarily retain freedom with
it: for, wherever the sovereignty is, there must the freedom be; the one cannot
be in one place and the other in another.

As the repository where the sovereign power is lodged is the first criterion
of distinction; the second is the principles on which it is administered.

A despotic government knows no principle but WILL. Whatever the sovereign
wills to do, the government admits him the inherent right, and the uncontrouled
power of doing. He is restrained by no fixed rule of right and wrong, for he
makes the right and wrong himself and as he pleases. -- If he happens (for a
miracle may happen) to be a man of consummate wisdom, justice and moderation,
of a mild affectionate disposition, disposed to business, and understanding and
promoting the general good, all the beneficial purposes of government will be
answered under his administration, and the people so governed may, while this
is the case, be prosperous and easy. But as there can be no security that this
disposition will last, and this administration continue, and still less
security that his successor shall have the same qualities and pursue the same
measures; therefore no people exercising their reason and understanding their
rights, would, of their own choice, invest any one man with such a power.

NEITHER is it consistent to suppose the knowledge of any one man competent to
the exercise of such a power. A Sovereign of this sort, is brought up in such a
distant line of life, and lives so remote from the people, and from a knowledge
of every thing which relates to their local situations and interests, that he
can know nothing from experience and observation, and all which he does know he
must be told. Sovereign power without sovereign knowledge, that is, a full
knowledge of all the matters over which that power is to be exercised, is a
something which contradicts itself.

THERE is a species of sovereign power in a single person, which is very proper
when applied to a commander in chief over an army, so far as relates to the
military government of an army, and the condition and purpose of an army
constitute the reason why it is so.

IN an army every man is of the same profession, that is, he is a soldier, and
the commander in chief is a soldier too: therefore the knowledge necessary to
the exercise of the power is within himself. By understanding what a soldier
is, he comprehends the local situation, interest and duty of every man within,
what may be called, the dominion of his command; and therefore the condition
and circumstances of an army make fitness for the exercise of the power.

THE purpose likewise, or object of an army, is another reason: for this power
in a commander in chief, though exercised over the army, is not exercised
against it; but is exercised through or over the army against the enemy.
Therefore the enemy, and not the people, is the object it is directed to.
Neither is it exercised over an army, for the purpose of raising a revenue from
it, but to promote its combined interest, condense its powers, and give it
capacity for action.

BUT all these reasons cease when sovereign power is transferred from the
commander of an army to the commander of a nation, and entirely loses its
fitness when applied to govern subjects following occupations, as it governs
soldiers following arms. A nation is quite another element, and every thing in
it differs not only from each other, but all of them differ from those of an
army. A nation is composed of distinct unconnected individuals, following
various trades, employments and pursuits; continually meeting, crossing,
uniting, opposing and separating from each other as accident, interest and
circumstance shall direct. -- An army has but one occupation and but one
interest.

ANOTHER very material matter in which an army and a nation differ, is that of
temper. An army may be said to have but one temper; for, however the natural
temper of the persons composing the army may differ from each other, there is a
second temper takes place of the first: a temper formed by discipline,
mutuality of habits, union of objects and pursuits, and the style of military
manners: but this can never be the case among all the individuals of a nation.
Therefore the fitness, arising from those circumstances, which disposes an army
to the command of a single person, and the fitness of a single person to that
command, is not to be found either in one or the other, when we come to
consider them as a sovereign and a nation.

HAVING already shown what a despotic government is, and how it is
administered, I now come to show what the administration of a republic is.

THE administration of a republic is supposed to be directed by certain
fundamental principles of right and justice, from which there cannot, because
there ought not to, be any deviation; and whenever and deviation appears, there
is a kind of stepping out of the republican principle, and an approach toward
the despotic one. This administration is executed by a select number of
persons, periodically chosen by the people, and act as representatives and in
behalf of the whole, and who are supposed to enact the same laws, and pursue
the same line of administration, as the whole of the people would do were they
assembled together.

THE PUBLIC GOOD is to be their object. It is therefore necessary to understand
what Public Good is.

PUBLIC Good is not a term opposed to the good of individuals; on the contrary,
it is the good of every individual collected. It is the good of all, because it
is the good of every one: for as the public body is every individual collected,
so the public good is the collected good of those individuals.

THE foundation-principle of Public Good is justice, and wherever justice is
impartially administered the public good is promoted; for as it is to the good
of every man that no injustice be done to him, so likewise it is to his good
that the principle which secures him should not be violated in the person of
another, because such a violation weakens his security, and leaves to chance
what ought to be to him a rock to stand on.

BUT in order to understand more minutely, how the Public Good is to be
promoted, and the manner in which the representatives are to act to promote it,
we must have recourse to the original or first principles, on which the people
formed themselves into a republic.

WHEN a people agree to form themselves into a republic (for the word REPUBLIC
means the PUBLIC GOOD, or the good of the whole, in contradistinction to the
despotic form, which makes the good of the sovereign, or of one man, the only
object of the government) when, I say, they agree to do this, it is to be
understood, that they mutually resolve and pledge themselves to each other,
rich and poor alike, to support and maintain this rule of equal justice among
them. They therefore renounce not only the despotic form, but the despotic
principle, as well of governing as of being governed by mere Will and Power,
and substitute in its place a government of justice.

BY this mutual compact the citizens of a republic put it out of their power,
that is, they renounce, as detestable, the power of exercising, at any future
time, any species of despotism over each other, or doing a thing, not right in
itself, because a majority of them may have strength or numbers sufficient to
accomplish it.

IN this pledge and compact This pledge and compact is contained in the
declaration of Rights prefixed to the constitution, and is as follows -- I.
THAT all men are born equally free and independent, and have certain natural,
inherent and unalienable rights, amongst which are the enjoying and defending
life and liberty, acquiring, possessing and protecting property, and pursuing
and obtaining happiness and safety. II. THAT all men have a natural and
unalienable right to worship Almighty God, according to the dictates of their
own consciences and understanding: And that no man ought or of right can be
compelled to attend any religious worship, or erect or support any place of
worship, or maintain any ministry, contrary to, or against, his own free will
and consent: Nor can any man. who acknowledges the being of a God, be justly
deprived or abridged of any civil right as a citizen, on account of his
religious sentiments or peculiar mode of religious worship: And that no
authority can or ought to be vested in, or assumed by any power whatever, that
shall in any case interfere with, or in any manner control, the right of
conscience in the free exercise of religious worship. III. THAT the people of
this state have the sole, exclusive and inherent right of governing and
regulating the internal police of the same. IV. THAT all power being originally
inherent in, and consequently derived from, the people; therefore all officers
of government, whether legislative or executive, are their trustees and
servants, and at all times accountable to them. V. THAT government is, or ought
to be, instituted for the common benefit, protection and security of the
people, nation or community; and not for the particular emolument or advantage
of any single man, family or set of men who are a part only of that community:
And that the community has an indubitable, unalienable and indefeasible right
to reform, alter or abolish government in such manner as shall be by that
community judged most conducive to the public weal. VI. THAT those who are
employed in the legislative and executive business of the state may be
restrained from oppression, the people have a right, at such periods as they
may think proper, to reduce their public officers to a private station, and
supply the vacancies by certain and regular elections. VII. THAT all elections
ought to be free; and that all free men having a sufficient evident common
interest with, and attachment to the community, have a right to elect officers,
or be elected into office. VIII. THAT every member of society has a right to
be protected in the enjoyment of life, liberty and property, and therefore is
bound to contribute his proportion toward the expense of that protection, and
yield his personal service when necessary, or an equivalent thereto: But no
part of a man's property can be justly taken from him, or applied to public
uses, without his own consent, or that of his legal representatives: Nor can
any man who is conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms, be justly compelled
thereto, if he will pay such equivalent: Nor are the people bound by any laws,
but such as they have in like manner assented to, for their common good. IX.
THAT in all prosecutions for criminal offenses, a man has a right to be heard
by himself and his council, to demand the cause and nature of his accusation,
to be confronted with the witnesses, to call for evidence in his favor, and a
speedy public trial, by an impartial jury of the country, without the unanimous
consent of which jury he cannot be found guilty: Nor can he be compelled to
give evidence against himself: Nor can any man be justly deprived of his
liberty, except by the laws of the land, or the judgment of his peers. X. THAT
the people have a right to hold themselves, their houses, papers, and
possessions free from search or seizure; and therefore warrants without oaths
or affirmations first made, affording a sufficient foundation for them, and
whereby any officer or messenger may be commanded or required to search
suspected places, or to seize any person or persons, his or their property, not
particularly described, are contrary to that right, and ought not to be
granted. XI. THAT in controversies respecting property, and in suits between
man and man, the parties have a right to trial by jury, which ought to be held
sacred. XII. THAT the people have a right to freedom of speech, and of writing,
and publishing their sentiments; therefore the freedom of the press ought not
to be restrained. XIII. THAT the people have a right to bear arms for the
defense of themselves and the state; and as standing armies in the time of
peace, are dangerous to liberty, they ought not to be kept up: And that the
military should be kept under strict subordination to, and governed by, the
civil power. XIV. THAT a frequent recurrence to fundamental principles, and a
firm adherence to justice, moderation, temperance, industry and frugality are
absolutely necessary to preserve the blessings of liberty and keep a government
free: The people ought therefore to pay particular attention to these points in
the choice of officers and representatives, and have a right to exact a due and
constant regard to them, from their legislators and magistrates, in the making
and executing such laws as are necessary for the good government of the state.
XV. THAT all men have a natural inherent right to emigrate from one state to
another that will receive them, or to form a new state in vacant countries, or
in such countries as they can purchase, whenever they think that thereby they
may promote their own happiness. XVI. THAT the people have a right to assemble
together, to consult for their common good, to instruct their representatives,
and to apply to the legislature for redress of grievances, by address,
petition, or remonstrance.

lies the foundation of the republic: and the security to the rich and the
consolation to the poor is, that what each man has is his own; that no despotic
sovereign can take it from him, and that the common cementing principle which
holds all the parts of a republic together, secures him likewise from the
despotism of numbers: For despotism may be more effectually acted by many over
a few than by one man over all.

THEREFORE, in order to know how far the power of an Assembly, or a house of
representatives can act in administering the affairs of a republic, we must
examine how far the power of the people extends under the original compact they
have made with each other; for the power of the representatives is in many
cases less, but never can be greater than that of the people represented; and
whatever the people in their mutual original compact have renounced the power
of doing toward, or acting over each other, the representatives can not assume
the power to do, because, as I have already said, the power of the
representatives cannot be greater than that of the people whom they represent.

IN this place it naturally presents itself that the people in their original
compact of equal justice or first principles of a republic, renounced, as
despotic, detestable and unjust, the assuming a right of breaking and violating
their engagements, contracts and compacts with, or defrauding, imposing or
tyrannizing over, each other, and therefore the representatives can not make an
Act to do it for them, and any such an Act would be an attempt to depose, not
the personal sovereign, but the sovereign principle of the republic, and to
introduce despotism in its stead.

IT may in this place be proper to distinguish between that species of
sovereignty which is claimed and exercised by despotic monarchs, and that
sovereignty which the citizens of a republic inherit and retain. -- The
sovereignty of a despotic monarch assumes the power of making wrong right, or
right wrong, as he pleases or as it suits him. The sovereignty in a republic is
exercised to keep right and wrong in their proper and distinct places, and
never to suffer the one to usurp the place of the other. A republic, properly
understood, is a sovereignty of justice in contradistinction to a sovereignty
of Will.

OUR experience in republicanism is yet so slender, that it is much to be
doubted, whether all our public Laws and Acts are consistent with, or can be
justified on, the principles of a republican government.

WE have been so much habited to act in committees at the commencement of the
dispute, and during the interregnum of government, and in many cases since, and
to adopt expedients warranted by necessity, and to permit to ourselves a
discretionary use of power suited to the spur and exigency of the moment, that
a man transferred from a committee to a seat in the Legislature imperceptibly
takes with him the ideas and habits he has been accustomed to, and continues to
think like a committee-man instead of a legislator, and to govern by spirit
rather than by the rule of the constitution and the principles of the Republic.

HAVING already stated that the power of the representatives can never exceed
the power of the people whom they represent, I now proceed to examine more
particularly, what the power of the representatives is.

IT is, in the first place, the power of acting as legislalators in making
laws, -- and in the second place, the power of acting in certain cases, as
agents or negociators for the Commonwealth, for such purposes as the
circumstances of the Commonwealth require.

A VERY strange confusion of ideas dangerous to the credit, stability, and the
good and honor of the Commonwealth has arisen by confounding those two distinct
powers and things together, and blending every Act of the Assembly, of whatever
kind it may be, under one general name of "Laws of the Commonwealth," and
thereby creating an opinion (which is truly of the despotic kind) that every
succeeding Assembly has an equal power over every transaction, as well as law,
done by a former Assembly.

ALL laws are Acts, but all Acts are not laws. Many of the Acts of the Assembly
are Acts of agency or negotiation, that is, they are Acts of contract and
agreement, on the part of the State, with certain persons therein mentioned,
and for certain purposes therein recited. An Act of this kind, after it has
passed the House, is of the nature of a deed or contract, signed, sealed and
delivered; and subject to the same general laws and principles of justice as
all other deeds and contracts are: for in a transaction of this kind the State
stands as an individual, and can be known in no other character in a court of
justice.

By "LAWS" as distinct from the agency transactions, or matters of negotiation,
are to be comprehended all those public Acts of the Assembly or Commonwealth,
which have a universal operation, or apply themselves to every individual of
the Commonwealth. Of this kind are the laws for the distribution and
administration of justice, for the preservation of the peace, for the security
of property, for raising the necessary revenue by just proportions, etc. etc.

ACTS of this kind are properly LAWS, and they may be altered and amended or
repealed, or others substituted in their places, as experience shall direct,
for the better effecting the purpose for which they were intended: and the
right and power of the Assembly to do this, is derived from the right and power
which the people, were they all assembled together, instead of being
represented, would have to do the same thing: because, in Acts or laws of this
kind, there is no other party than the public. The law, or the alteration, or
the repeal, is for themselves; -- and whatever the effects may be, it falls on
themselves; -- if for the better, they have the benefit of it -- if for the
worse, they suffer the inconvenience. No violence to any one is here offered --
no breach of faith is here committed. It is therefore one of these rights and
powers which is within the sense, meaning and limits of the original compact of
justice which they formed with each other as the foundation principle of the
Republic, and being one of those rights and powers, it devolves on their
representatives by delegation.

As it is not my intention (neither is it within the limits assigned to this
work) to define every species of what may be called LAWS, (but rather to
distinguish that part in which the representatives act as agents or negociators
for the State, from the legislative part,) I shall pass on to distinguish and
describe those Acts of the Assembly which are Acts of agency or negotiation,
and to show that as they are different in their nature, construction and
operation from legislative Acts, so likewise the power and authority of the
Assembly over them, after they are passed, is different.

IT must occur to every person on the first reflection, that the affairs and
circumstances of a Commonwealth require other business to be done besides that
of making laws, and consequently, that the different kinds of business cannot
all be classed under one name, or be subject to one and the same rule of
treatment. -- But to proceed --

BY agency transactions, or matters of negotiation, done by the Assembly, are
to be comprehended all that kind of public business, which the Assembly, as
representatives of the Republic, transact in its behalf, with certain person or
persons, or part or parts of the Republic, for purposes mentioned in the Act,
and which the Assembly confirm and ratify on the part of the Commonwealth, by
affixing to it the seal of the State.

AN Act of this kind, differs from a law of the before mentioned kind; because
here are two parties and there but one, and the parties are bound to perform
different and distinct parts: whereas, in the before mentioned law, every man's
part was the same.

THESE Acts, therefore, though numbered among the laws, are evidently distinct
therefrom, and are not of the legislative kind. The former are laws for the
government of the Commonwealth; these are transactions of business, such as,
selling and conveying an estate belonging to the public, or buying one; Acts
for borrowing money, and fixing with the lender the terms and mode of payment;
Acts of agreement and contract, with certain person or persons, for certain
purposes; and, in short, every kind of Act in which two parties, the State
being one, are particularly mentioned or described, and in which the form and
nature of a bargain or contract is comprehended. -- These, if for custom and
uniformity sake we call by the name of LAWS, they are not laws for the
government of the Commonwealth, but for the government of the contracting
parties, as all deeds and contracts are; and are not, properly speaking, Acts
of the Assembly, but joint Acts, or Acts of the Assembly in behalf of the
Commonwealth on one part, and certain persons therein mentioned on the other
part.

ACTS of this kind are distinguishable into two classes. --

FIRST, those wherein the matters inserted in the Act have already been settled
and adjusted between the State on one part, and the persons therein mentioned
on the other part. In this case the Act is the completion and ratification of
the contract or matters therein recited. It is in fact a deed signed, sealed
and delivered.

SECONDLY, those Acts wherein the matters have not been already agreed upon,
and wherein the Act only holds forth certain propositions and terms to be
accepted of and acceded to.

I SHALL give an instance of each of those Acts. First -- The State wants the
loan of a sum of money -- certain persons make an offer to Government to lend
that sum, and send in their proposals: the Government accept these proposals
and all the matters of the loan and the payment are agreed on; and an Act is
passed, according to the usual form of passing Acts, ratifying and confirming
this agreement. This Act is final.

IN the second case, -- The State, as in the preceding one, wants a loan of
money -- the Assembly passes an Act holding forth the terms on which it will
borrow and pay: this Act has no force, until the propositions and terms are
accepted of and acceded to by some person or persons, and when those terms are
accepted of and complied with the Act is binding on the State. -- But if at the
meeting of the next Assembly, or any other, the whole sum intended to be
borrowed, should not be borrowed, that Assembly may stop where they are, and
discontinue proceeding with the loan, or make new propositions and terms for
the remainder; but so far as the subscriptions have been filled up, and the
terms complied with, it is, as in the first case, a signed deed: and in the
same manner are all Acts, let the matters in them be what they may, wherein, as
I have before mentioned, the State on one part, and certain individuals on the
other part, are parties in the Act.

If the State should become a bankrupt, the creditors, as in all cases of
bankruptcy, will be sufferers; they will have but a dividend for the whole: but
this is not a dissolution of the contract, but an accommodation of it, arising
from necessity. And so in all cases of Acts of this kind, if an inability takes
place on either side, the contract cannot be performed, and some accommodation
must be gone into or the matter falls through of itself.

IT may likewise happen, though it ought not to happen, that in performing the
matters, agreeably to the terms of the Act, inconveniences, unforeseen at the
time of making the Act, may arise to either or both parties: in this case,
those inconveniences may be removed by the mutual consent and agreement of the
parties, and each find its benefit in so doing: for in a Republic it is the
harmony of its parts that constitutes their several and mutual Good.

BUT the Acts themselves are legally binding, as much as if they had been made
between two private individuals. The greatness of one party cannot give it a
superiority of advantage over the other. The State, or its representatives the
Assembly, has no more power over an Act of this kind, after it is passed, than
if the State was a private person. It is the glory of a Republic to have it so,
because it secures the individual from becoming the prey of power, and prevents
MIGHT overcoming RIGHT.

IF any difference or dispute arise afterward between the State and the
individuals with whom the agreement is made, respecting the contract, or the
meaning, or extent of any of the matters contained in the Act, which may affect
the property or interest of either, such difference or dispute must be judged
of, and decided upon, by the laws of the land, in a court of justice and trial
by jury; that is, by the laws of the land already in being at the time such Act
and contract was made. -- No law made afterward can apply to the case, either
directly, or by construction or implication: For such a law would be a
retrospective law, or a law made after the fact, and cannot even be produced in
court as applying to the case before it for judgment.

THAT this is justice, that it is the true principle of republican government,
no man will be so hardy as to deny: -- If, therefore, a lawful contract or
agreement, sealed and ratified, cannot be affected or altered by any Act made
afterward, how much more inconsistend and irrational, despotic and unjust
would it be, to think of making an Act with the professed intention of breaking
up a contract already signed and sealed.

THAT it is possible an Assembly, in the heat and indiscretion of party, and
meditating on power rather than on the principle by which all power in a
republican government is governed, that of equal justice, may fall into the
error of passing such an Act, is admitted; -- but it would be an actless Act,
an Act that goes for nothing, an Act which the courts of justice, and the
established laws of the land, could know nothing of.

BECAUSE such an Act would be an Act of one party only, not only without, but
against the consent of the other; and, therefore, cannot be produced to affect
a contract made between the two. -- That the violation of a contract should be
set up as a justification to the violator, would be the same thing as to say,
that a man by breaking his promise is freed from the obligation of it, or that
by transgressing the laws he exempts himself from the punishment of them.

BESIDES the constitutional and legal reasons why an Assembly cannot, of its
own Act and authority, undo or make void a contract made between the State, (by
a former Assembly,) and certain individuals, may be added, what may be called,
the natural reasons, or those reasons which the plain rules of common sense
point out to every man. Among which are the following.

THE Principals, or real parties, in the contract, are the State and the
persons contracted with. The Assembly is not a party, but an Agent in behalf of
the State, authorized and empowered to transact its affairs.

THEREFORE it is the State that is bound on one part and certain individuals on
the other part, and the performance of the contract, according to the
conditions of it, devolves on succeeding Assemblies, not as Principals, but as
Agents.

THEREFORE for the next or any other Assembly to undertake to dissolve the
State from its obligation is an assumption of power of a novel and
extraordinary kind -- It is the Servant attempting to free his Master.

THE election of new Assemblies following each other makes no difference in the
nature of the thing. The State is still the same State. -- The public is still
the same body. These do not annually expire though the time of an Assembly
does. These are not new-created every year, nor can they be displaced from
their original standing; but are a perpetual permanent body, always in being
and still the same.

BUT if we adopt the vague inconsistent idea that every new Assembly has a full
and complete authority over every Act done by the State in a former Assembly,
and confound together laws, contracts and every species of public business, it
will lead us into a wilderness of endless confusion and unsurmountable
difficulties. It would be declaring an Assembly despotic for the time being. --
Instead of a government of established principles administered by established
rules, the authority of Government by being strained so high, would, by the
same rule, be reduced proportionably as low, and would be no other than that of
a Committee of the State acting with discretionary powers for one year. Every
new election would be a new revolution, or it would suppose the public of the
former year dead and a new public risen in its place.

HAVING now endeavored to fix a precise idea to, and distinguish between,
Legislative Acts and Acts of Negotiation and Agency, I shall proceed to apply
this distinction to the case now in dispute, respecting the charter of the Bank.

THE charter of the Bank, or what is the same thing, the Act for incorporating
it, is to all intents and purposes an Act of Negotiation and Contract, entered
into, and confirmed, between the State on one part, and certain persons
mentioned therein on the other part. The purpose for which the Act was done on
the part of the State is therein recited, viz. the support which the finances
of the country would derive therefrom. The incorporating clause is the
condition or obligation on the part of the State; and the obligation on the
part of the Bank, is, that nothing contained in that Act shall be construed to
authorize the said Corporation to exercise any powers in this State repugnant
to the laws or constitution thereof.

HERE are all the marks and evidences of a Contract. The Parties -- the Purport
-- and the reciprocal Obligations.

THAT it is a Contract, or a joint Act, is evident from its being in the power
of either of the parties to have forbidden or prevented its being done. The
State could not force the stockholders of the Bank to be a corporation, and
therefore as their consent was necessary to the making the Act, their dissent
would have prevented its being made; so on the other hand, as the Bank could
not force the State to incorporate them, the consent or dissent of the State
would have had the same effect to do, or to prevent its being done; and as
neither of theparties could make the Act alone, for the same reason can neither
of them dissolve it alone: But this is not the case with a law or Act of
legislation, and therefore the difference proves it to be an Act of a different
kind.

THE Bank may forfeit the charter by delinquency, but the delinquency must be
proved and established by a legal process in a court of justice and trial by
jury: for the State, or the Assembly, is not to be a judge in its own case, but
must come to the laws of the land for judgment; for that which is law for the
individual, is likewise law for the State.

BEFORE I enter farther into this affair, I shall go back to the circumstances
of the country and the condition the Government was in, for some time before,
as well as at the time it entered into this engagement with the Bank, and this
Act of incorporation was passed: for the Government of this State, and I
suppose the same of the rest, were then in want of two of the most essential
matters which governments could be destitute of. -- Money and Credit. --

IN looking back to those times, and bringing forward some of the circumstances
attending them, I feel myself entering on unpleasant and disagreeable ground;
because some of the matters which the attack on the Bank now make necessary to
state, in order to bring the affair fully before the Public, will not add honor
to those who have promoted that measure, and carried it through the late House
of Assembly; and for whom, though my own judgment and opinion on the case oblige
me to differ from, I retain my esteem, and the social remembrance of times
past. But, I trust, those Gentlemen will do me the justice to recollect my
exceeding earnestness with them, last spring, when the attack on the Bank first
broke out; for it clearly appeared to me one of those overheated measures,
which, neither the country at large, nor their own constituents, would justify
them in when it came to be fully and clearly understood; for however high a
party-measure may be carried in an Assembly, the people out of doors are all
the while following their several occupations and employments, minding their
farms and their business, and take their own time and leisure to judge of
public measures; the consequence of which is that they often judge in a cooler
spirit than their representatives act in.

IT may be easily recollected that the present Bank was preceded by, and rose
out, of a former one, called the Pennsylvania Bank, which began a few months
before; the occasion of which I shall briefly state.

IN the spring 1780, the Pennsylvania Assembly was composed of many of the same
Members, and nearly all of the same connection, which composed the late House
that began the attack on the Bank. I served as Clerk of the Assembly of 1780,
which station I resigned at the end of the year and accompanied a much lamented
friend the late Colonel John Laurens on an embassy to France.

THE spring of 1780 was marked with an accumulation of misfortunes. The
reliance placed on the defense of Charlestown failed and exceedingly lowered or
rather depressed the spirits of the country. The measures of Government, from
the want of money, means and credit, dragged on like a heavy loaded carriage
without wheels, and were nearly got to what a countryman would understand by a
dead pull.

THE assembly of that year met by adjournment at an unusual time, the tenth of
May, and what particularly added to the affliction, was, that so many of the
Members, instead of spiriting up their constituents to the most nervous
exertions, came to the Assembly furnished with petitions to be exempt from
paying taxes. How the public measures were to be carried on, the country
defended, and the army recruited, clothed, fed, and paid, when the only
resource, and that not half sufficient, that of taxes, should be relaxed to
almost nothing, was a matter too gloomy to look at. A language very different
from that of petitions ought at this time to have been the language of every
one. A declaration to have stood forth with their lives and fortunes, and a
reprobation of every thought of partial indulgence would have sounded much
better than petitions.

WHILE the Assembly was sitting a letter from the Commander in chief was
received by the Executive Council and transmitted to the House. The doors were
shut and it fell officially to me to read.

IN this letter the naked truth of things was unsolded. Among other
informations the General said, that notwithstanding his confidence in the
attachment of the army to the cause of the country, the distresses of it, from
the want of every necessary which men could be destitute of, were arisen to
such a pitch, that the appearance of mutiny and discontent were so strongly
marked on the countenance of the army that he dreaded the event of every hour.

WHEN the letter was read I observed a despairing silence in the House. No body
spoke for a considerable time. At length a Member of whose fortitude to
withstand misfortunes I had a high opinion, rose: If, said he, the account in
that letter is a true state of things; and we are in the situation there
represented, it appears to me in vain to contend the matter any longer. We may
as well give up at first as at last.

THE Gentleman who spoke next, was (to the best of my recollection) a Member
from Bucks county, who, in a cheerful note, endeavored to dissipate the gloom
of the House -- "Well, well," said he, don't let the House despair, if things
are not so well as we wish, we must endeavor to make them better. And on a
motion for adjournment, the conversation went no farther.

THERE was now no time to lose, and something absolutely necessary to be done,
which was not within the immediate power of the House to do: for what with the
depreciation of the Currency, the slow operation of taxes, and the petitions to
be exempt therefrom, the treasury was moneyless, and the Government creditless.

IF the Assembly could not give the assistance which the necessity of the case
immediately required, it was very proper the matter should be known by those
who either could or would endeavor to do it. To conceal the information within
the House, and not provide the relief which that information required, was
making no use of the knowledge and endangering the Public Cause, The only thing
that now remained, and was capable of reaching the case, was private credit,
and the voluntary aid of individuals; and under this impression, on my return
from the House, I drew out the salary due to me as Clerk, enclosed five hundred
dollars in a letter to a Gentleman in this City, in part of the whole, and
wrote fully to him on the subject of our affairs.

THE Gentleman to whom this letter was addressed is Mr. Blair M'Clenaghan. I
mentioned to him, that notwithstanding the current opinion that the enemy were
beaten from before Charlestown, there were too many reasons to believe the
place was then taken and in the hands of the enemy; the consequence of which
would be, that a great part of the British force would return, and join that at
New York. That our own army required to be augmented, ten thousand men, to be
able to stand against the combined force of the enemy. I informed Mr.
M'Clenaghan of General Washington's letter, the extreme distresses he was
surrounded with, and the absolute occasion there was for the citizens to exert
themselves at this time, which there was no doubt they would do, if the
necessity was made known to them; for that the ability of Government was
exhausted. I requested Mr. M'Clenaghan, to propose a voluntary subscription
among his friends, and added, that I had enclosed five hundred dollars as my
mite thereto, and that I would increase it as far as the last ability would
enable me to go. Mr. M'Clenaghan being now returned from Europe, has my consent
to show the letter to any Gentleman who may be inclined to see it.


THE next day Mr. M'Clenaghan informed me, he had communicated the contents of
the letter at a meeting of Gentlemen at the Coffee-house, and that a
subscription was immediately began -- that Mr. Robert Morris and himself had
subscribed two hundred pounds each, in hard money, and that the subscription
was going very successfully on. -- This subscription was intended as a
donation, and to be given in bounties to promote the recruiting service. It is
dated June 8th, 1780. The original subscription list is now in my possession --
it amounts to four hundred pounds hard money, and one hundred and one thousand
three hundred and sixty pounds continental.

WHILE this subscription was going forward, information of the loss of
Charlestown arrived, Col. Tennant, Aid to General Lincoln, arrived the 14th of
June, with despatches of the capitulation of Charlestown.
and on a communication from several Members of Congress to certain Gentlemen
of this city, of the increasing distresses and dangers then taking place, a
meeting was held of the subscribers, and such other Gentlemen who chose to
attend, at the City Tavern. This meeting was on the 17th of June, nine days
after the subscriptions had began.

AT this meeting it was resolved to open a security subscription, to the amount
of three hundred thousand pounds, Pennsylvania currency, in real money; the
subscribers to execute bonds to the amount of their subscriptions, and to form
a Bank thereon for supplying the army. This being resolved on and carried into
execution the plan of the first subscriptions was discontinued, and this
extended one established in its stead.

BY means of this Bank the army was supplied through the campaign, and being at
the same time recruited, was enabled to maintain its ground: And on the
appointment of Mr. Morris to be Superintendant of the finances the spring
following, he arranged the system of the present Bank, styled the Bank of
North America, and many of the subscribers of the former Bank transferred their
subscriptions into this.

TOWARD the establishment of this Bank, Congress passed an ordinance of
incorporation December 21st 1781, which the Government of Pennsylvania
recognized by sundry matters: And afterward, on an application from the
President and Directors of the Bank, through the mediation of the Executive
Council, the Assembly agreed to, and passed the State Act of Incorporation
April 1st 1782.

THUS arose the Bank -- produced by the distress of the times and the
enterprising spirit of patriotic individuals. -- Those individuals furnished
and risked the money, and the aid which the Government contributed was that of
incorporating them. -- It would have been well if the State had made all its
bargains and contracts with as much true policy as it made this; for a greater
service for so small a consideration, that only of an Act of incorporation, has
not been obtained since the Government existed.

HAVING now shown how the Bank originated, I shall proceed with my remarks.

THE sudden restoration of public and private credit, which took place on the
establishment of the Bank is an event as extraordinary in itself as any
domestic occurrence during the progress of the Revolution.

HOW far a spirit of envy might operate to produce the attack on the Bank
during the sitting of the late Assembly, is best known and felt by those who
began or promoted that attack. The Bank had rendered services which the
Assembly of 1780 could not, and acquired an honor which many of its Members
might be unwilling to own, and wish to obscure.

BUT surely every wise Government acting on the principles of patriotism and
Public Good would cherish an Institution capable of rendering such advantages
to the Community. The establishment of the Bank in one of the most trying
vicissitudes of the war, its zealous services in the public cause, its
influence in restoring and supporting credit, and the punctuality with which
all its business has been transacted, are matters, that so far from meriting
the treatment it met with from the late Assembly, are an honor to the State,
and what the body of her citizens may be proud to own.

BUT the attack on the Bank, as a Chartered Institution, under the protection
of its violators, however criminal it may be as an error of Government, or
impolitic as a measure of party, is not to be charged on the constituents of
those who made the attack. It appears from every circumstance that has come to
light to be a measure which that Assembly contrived of itself. The Members did
not come charged with the affair from their constituents. There was no idea of
such a thing when they were elected or when they met. The hasty and precipitate
manner in which it was hurried through the House, and the refusal of the House
to hear the Directors of the Bank in its defense, prior to the publication of
the repealing Bill for public consideration, operated to prevent their
constituents comprehending the subject: Therefore, whatever may be wrong in the
proceedings lies not at the door of the Public. The House took the affair on
its own shoulders, and whatever blame there is lies on them.

THE matter must have been prejudged and predetermined by a majority of the
Members out of the House, before it was brought into it. The whole business
appears to have been fixed at once, and all reasoning or debate on the case
rendered useless.

PETITIONS from a very inconsiderable number of persons suddenly procured, and
so privately done, as to be a secret among the few that signed them, were
presented to the House and read twice in one day, and referred to a Committee
of the House to inquire and report thereon. I here subjoin the Petition Minutes
of the Assembly, March 21, 1785. Petitions from a considerable number of the
inhabitants of Chester county were read, representing that the bank established
at Philadelphia has fatal effects upon the Community; that whilst men are
enabled, by means of the bank, to receive near three times the rate of common
interest, and at the same time to receive their money at very short warning,
whenever they have occasion for it, it will be impossible for the husbandman or
mechanic to borrow on the former terms of legal interest and distant payments
of the principal; that the best security will not enable the person to borrow;
that experience clearly demonstrates the mischievous consequences of this
institution to the fair trader; that impostors have been enabled to support
themselves in a fictitious credit, by means of a temporary punctuality at the
bank, until they have drawn in their honest neighbors to trust them with their
property, or to pledge their credit' as sureties, and have been sinally
involved in ruin and distress; that they have repeatedly seen the stopping of
discounts at the bank, operate on the trading part of the Community, with a
degree of violence scarcely inferior to that of a stagnation of the blood in
the human body, hurrying the wretched merchant who has debts to pay into the
hands of griping usurers; that the Directors of the bank may give such
preference in trade, by advances of money, to their particular favorites, as to
destroy that equality which ought to prevail in a commercial country; that
paper-money has often proved beneficial to the state, but the bank forbids it,
and the people must acquiesce: therefore, and in order to restore public
confidence and private security, they pray that a bill may be brought in and
passed into a law for repealing the law for incorporating the bank.

March 28.

The report of the committee, read March 25, on the petitions from the counties
of Chester and Berks, and the city of Philadelphia and its vicinity, praying
the act of Assembly, whereby the bank was established at Philadelphia, may be
repealed, was read the second time as follows, viz.

The committee to whom were referred the petitions concerning the bank
established at Philadelphia, and who were instructed to inquire whether the
said bank be compatible with the public safety, and that equality which ought
ever to prevail between the individuals of a republic, beg leave to report,
That it is the opinion of this committee, that the said bank, as at present
established, is in every view incompatible with the public safety: that in the
present state of our trade, the said bank has a direct tendency to banish a
great part of the specie from the country, so as to produce a scarcity of
money, and to collect into the hands of the stockholders of the said bank
almost the whole of the money which remains amongst us. That the accumulation
of enormous wealth in the hands of a society, who claim perpetual duration,
will necessarily produce a degree of influence and power, which cannot be
entrusted in the hands of any set of men whatsoever, without endangering the
public safety. That the said bank, in its corporate capacity, is empowered to
hold estates to the amount of ten millions of dollars, and by the tenor of the
present charter, is to exist forever, without being obliged to yield any
emolument to the government, or to be at all dependent upon it. That the great
profits of the bank, which will daily increase as money grows scarcer, and
which already far exceed the profits of European banks, have tempted foreigners
to vest their money in this bank, and thus to draw from us large sums for
interest.

That foreigners will doubtless be more and more induced to become
stockholders, until the time may arrive when this enormous engine of power may
become subject to foreign influence; this country may be agitated with the
politics of European courts, and the good people of America reduced once more
into a state of subordination, and dependence upon some one or other of the
European powers That at best, if it were even confined to the hands of
Americans, it would be totally destructive of that equality which ought to
prevail in a republic. We have nothing in our free and equal government capable
of balancing the influence which this bank must create; and we see nothing
which in the course of a sew years, can prevent the directors of the bank, from
governing Pennsylvania. Already we have felt its influence indirectly
interfering in the measures of the legislature. Already the house of Assembly,
the represent actives of the people have been threatened, that the credit of
our paper currency will be blasted by the bank; and if this growing evil
continous, we fear the time is not very distant, when the bank will be able to
dictate to the legislature, what laws to pass and what to forbear.

Your committee therefore beg leave further to report the following resolution
to be adopted by the house, viz.

Resolved, that a committee be appointed to bring in a bill to repeal the act
of Assembly, passed the first day of April 1782, entitled, " Affect to
incorporate the subscribers to the bank of North America;" and also to repeal
one other act of Assembly, passed the 18th of March, 1782, entitled, An act for
preventing and punishing the counterfeiting of the common seal, bank-bills and
bank-notes of the president, a^^^^ors and company, of the bank of
North America, and for the other purposes therein mentioned,


and the Report, and shall exercise the right and privilege of a citizen in
examining their merits, not for the purpose of opposition, but with a design of
making an intricate affair more generally and better understood.

So far as my private judgment is capable of comprehending the subject, it
appears to me, that the Committee were unacquainted with, and have totally
mistaken, the nature and business of a Bank, as well as the matter committed to
them, considered as a proceeding of Government.

THEY were instructed by the House to inquire whether the Bank established at
Philadelphia was compatible with the public safety.

IT is scarcely possible to suppose the instructions meant no more than that
they were to inquire of one another. It is certain they made no inquiry at the
Bank, to inform themselves of the situation of its affairs, how they were
conducted, what aids it had rendered the public cause, or whether any; nor do
the Committee produce in their report a single fact or circumstance to show
they made any inquiry at all, or whether the rumors then circulated were true
or false; but content themselves with modelling the insinuations of the
petitions into a report and giving an opinion thereon.

IT would appear from the report, that the Committee either conceived that the
House had already determined how it would act without regard to the case, and
that they were only a Committee for form sake, and to give a color of inquiry
without making any, or that the case was referred to them, as law-questions are
sometimes reserred to law-officers, for an opinion only.

THIS method of doing public business serves exceedingly to mislead 2 country.
-- When the constituents of an Assembly hear that an enquiry into any matter is
directed to be made, and a Committee appointed for that purpose, they naturally
conclude that the inquiry is made, and that the future proceedings of the House
are in consequence of the matters, facts, and information obtained by means of
that inquiry. -- But here is a Committee of inquiry making no inquiry at all,
and giving an opinion on a case without inquiring into it. This proceeding of
the Committee would justify an opinion that it was not their wish to get, but
to get over information, and lest the enquiry should not suit their wishes,
omitted to make any. The subsequent conduct of the House, in resolving not to
hear the Directors of the Bank on their application for that purpose, prior to
the publication of the Bill for the consideration of the people, strongly
corroborates this opinion: For why should not the House hear them, unless it
was apprehensive, that the Bank, by such a public opportunity, would produce
proofs of its services and usefulness, that would not suit the temper and views
of its opposers?

BUT if the House did not wish or choose to hear the defense of the Bank, it was
no reason their constituents should not. The Constitution of this State, in
lieu of having two branches of Legislature, has substituted, that To the end
that laws before they are enacted may be more maturely considered, and the
inconvenience of hasty determinations as much as possible prevented, all Bills
of a public nature shall be printed for the consideration deration of the
people Constitution, section the 15th.
. -- The people, therefore, according to the Constitution, stand in the place
of another House; or, more properly speaking, are a House in their own right.
-- But in this instance the Assembly arrogates the whole power to itself, and
places itself as a bar to stop the necessary information spreading among the
people. -- The application of the Bank to be heard before the Bill was
published for public consideration had two objects. -- First, to the House, --
and secondly, through the House to the people, who are as another House. It was
as a defense in the first instance, and as an appeal in the second. But the
Assembly absorbs the right of the people to judge; because, by refusing to hear
the desence, they barred the appeal. -- Were there no other cause which the
constituents of that Assembly had for censuring its conduct, than the exceeding
unmirness, partiality, and arbitrariness with which this business was
transacted, it would be cause sufficient.

LET the constituents of Assemblies differ, as they may, respecting certain
peculiarities in the form of the Constitution, they will all agree in
supporting its principles, and in reprobating unfair proceedings and despotic
measures. Every constituent is a member of the Republic, which is a station of
more consequence to him than being a member of a party, and though they may
differ from each other in their choice of persons to transact the public
business, it is of equal importance to all parties that the business be done on
right principles: otherwise our laws and Acts, instead of being founded in
justice, will be founded in party, and be laws and Acts of retaliation; and
instead of being a Republic of free citizens, we shall be alternately tyrants
and slaves. -- But to return to the Report. --

THE Report begins by stating that, The Committee to whom were referred the
petitions concerning the Bank established at Philadelphia, and who were
instructed to inquire whether the said Bank be compatible with the public
safety, and that equality which ought ever to prevail between the individuals
of a Republic, beg leave to report, (not that they have made any inquiry, but)
That it is the opinion of this Committee, that the said Bank, as at present
established, is, in every view, incompatible with the public safety. -- But why
is it so? Here is an opinion unfounded and unwarranted. The Committee have
began their Report at the wrong end; for an opinion, when given as a matter of
judgment, is an action of the mind which follows a fact, but here it is put in
the room of one.

THE Report then says, That in the present state of our trade the said Bank has
a direct tendency to banish a great part of the specie from the country, and to
collect into the hands of the stockholders of the Bank almost the whole of the
money which remains among us.

HERE is another mere assertion, just like the former, without a single fact or
circumstance to show why it is made or whereon it is founded. -- Now the very
reverse, of what the Committee asserts, is the natural consequence of a Bank.
-- Specie may be called the stock in trade of the Bank, it is therefore its
interest to prevent it from wandering out of the country, and to keep a
constant standing supply to be ready for all domestic occasions and demands.
Were it true that the Bank has a direct tendency to banish the specie from the
country, there would soon be an end to the Bank; and, therefore, the Committee
have so far mistaken the matter, as to put their fears in the place of their
wishes for if it is to happen as the Committee states, let the Bank alone and
it will cease of itself, and the repealing Act need not have been passed.

IT is the interest of the Bank that people should keep their cash there, and
all commercial countries find the exceeding great convenience of having a
general repository for their cash. -- But so far from banishing it, there are
no two classes of people in America who are so much interested in preserving
hard money in the country as the Bank and the Merchant. Neither of them can
carry on their business without it. Their opposition to the paper-money of the
late Assembly was because it has a direct effect, as far as it is able, to
banish the specie and that without providing any means for bringing more in.
The Committee must have been aware of this, and therefore chose to spread the
first alarm, and groundless as it was to trust to the delusion.

As the keeping the specie in the country is the interest of the Bank, so it
has the best opportunities of preventing its being sent away, and the earliest
knowledge of such a design. While the Bank is the general repository of cash no
great sums can be obtained without getting it from thence, and as it is
evidently prejudicial to its interest to advance money to be sent abroad,
because in this cash, the money can not by circulation return again, the Bank,
therefore, is interested in preventing what the Committee would have it
suspected of promoting.

IT is to prevent the exportation of cash and to retain it in the country that
the Bank has on several occasions stopped the discounting notes till the danger
has been passed. The petitions say "That they have repeatedly seen the stopping
of discounts at the bank, operate on the trading part of the Community, with a
degree of violence scarcely inferior to that of a stagnation of the blood in
the human body, harrying the wretched merchant who has debts to pay into the
hands of griping usurers." As the persons who say or signed this live somewhere
in Chester county, they are not, from situation, certain of what they say.
Those petitions have every appearance of being contrived for the purpose of
bringing the matter on. The petition and the report have strong evidence in
them of being both drawn up by the same person: for the report is as clearly
the echo of the petition as ever the address of the British (...) was the echo
of the King's speech.

Besides the reason I have already given for occasionally stopping discounting
notes at the bank, there are other necessary reasons. It is for the purpose of
settling accounts. Short reckonings make long friends. The bank lends its money
for short periods, and by that means assists a great many different people: and
if it did not sometimes stop discounting as a means of settling with the
persons it has already lent its money to, those persons would find a way to
keep what they had borrowed longer than they ought, and prevent others being
assisted. It is a fact, and some of the Committee know it to be so, that sundry
of those persons who then opposed the Bank acted this part.

The stopping the discounts do not, and cannot, operate to call in the loans
sooner than the time for which they were lent, and therefore the charge is
false that "it hurries men into the hands of griping usurers": -- and the truth
is, that it operates to keep them from thence.

If petitions are to be contrived to cover the designs of a house of Assembly
and give a pretense for its conduct. or if a house is to be led by the nose by
the idle tale of any fifty or sixty signers to a petition, it is time for the
public to look a little closer into the conduct of its representatives.


The first part, therefore, of the assertion, that of banishing the specie,
contains an apprehension as needless as it is groundless, and which, had the
Committee understood, or been the least informed of the nature of a Bank, they
could not have made. It is very probable that some of the opposers to the Bank
are those persons who have been disappointed in their attempt to obtain specie
for this purpose and now cloak their opposition under other pretenses.

I now come to the second part of the assertion, which is that when the Bank
has banished a great part of the specie from the country, "it will collect into
the hands of "the stockholders almost the whole of the money which "remains
among us." -- But how, or by what means, the Bank is to accomplish this
wonderful feat the Committee have not informed us. Whether people are to give
their money to the Bank for nothing, or whether the Bank is to charm it from
them as a rattlesnake charms a squirrel from a tree, the Committee have left us
as much in the dark about as they were themselves.

Is it possible the Committee should know so very little of the matter, as not
to know that no part of the money which at any time may be in the Bank belongs
to the stockholders; not even the original capital which they put in is any
part of it their own until every person who has a demand upon the Bank is paid,
and if there is not a sufficiency for this purpose on the balance of loss and
gain, the original money of the stockholders must make up the deficiency.

THE money which at any time may be in the Bank is the property of every man
who holds a Bank-note, or deposits cash there, or who has a just demand upon it
from the city of Philadelphia up to fort Pit, or to any part of the United
States; and he can draw the money from it when he pleases. Its being in the
Bank, does not in the least make it the property of the stockholders, any more
than the money in the State Treasury is the property of the State Treasurer.
They are only stewards over it for those who please to put it, or let it remain
there: and, therefore, this second part of the assertion is somewhat ridiculous.

THE next paragraph in the Report is, That the accumulation of enormous wealth
in the hands of a society who claim perpetual duration will necessarily produce
a degree of influence and power which cannot be entrusted in the hands of any
set of men whatsoever (the Committee I presume excepted) without endangering
the public safety. -- There is an air of solemn fear in this paragraph which is
somewhat like introducing a ghost in a play to keep people from laughing at the
players.

I HAVE already shown that whatever wealth there may be, at any time, in the
Bank, is the property of those who have demands upon the Bank, and not the
property of the stockholders. As a Society they hold no property, and most
probably never will, unless it should be a house to transact their business in,
instead of hiring one. Every half year the Bank settles its accounts and each
individual stockholder takes his dividend of gain or loss to himself, and the
Bank begins the next halfyear in the same manner it began the first, and so on.
This being the nature of a Bank, there can be no accumulation of wealth among
them as a society.

FOR what purpose the word "society" is introduced into the Report I do not
know, unless it be to make a false impression on people's minds. It has no
connection with the subject, for the Bank is not a society, but a company, and
denominated so in the Charter. There are several religious societies
incorporated in this State, which hold property as the right of those
societies, and to which no person can belong that is not of the same religious
profession. But this is not the case with the Bank. The Bank is a company for
the promotion and convenience of commerce, which is a matter in which all the
State is interested, and holds no property in the manner which those societies
do.

BUT there is a direct contradiction in this paragraph to that which goes
before it. The Committee, there, accuses the Bank of banishing the specie, and
here, of accumulating enormous sums of it. -- So here are two enormous sums of
specie; one enormous sum going out, and another enormous sum remaining. -- To
reconcile this contradiction, the Committee should have added to their Report,
that they suspected the Bank had found out the Philosopher's stone, and kept it
a secret.

THE next paragraph is, That the said Bank, in its corporate capacity, is
empowered to hold estates to the amount of ten millions of dollars, and by the
tenor of the present Charter is to exist for ever, without being obliged to
yield any emolument to the Government, or be at least dependent on it.

THE Committee have gone so vehemently into this business, and so completely
shown their want of knowledge in every point of it, as to make, in the first
part of this paragraph, a fear of what, the greater fear is, will never happen.
Had the Committee known anything of Banking, they must have known, that the
objection against Banks has been, (not that they held great estates, but) that
they held none; that they had no real, fixed, and visible property, and that it
is the maxim and practice of Banks not to hold any.

THE Honorable Chancellor Livingston, late Secretary for foreign affairs, did
me the honor of showing, and discoursing with me on, a plan of a Bank he had
drawn up for the State of New York. In this plan it was made a condition or
obligation, that whatever the capital of the Bank amounted to in specie, there
should be added twice as much in real estates. But the mercantile interest
rejected the proposition.

IT was a very good piece of policy in the Assembly which passed the Charter
Act, to add the Clause to empower the Bank to purchase and hold real estates.
It was as an inducement to the Bank to do it, because such estates being held
as the property of the Bank would be so many mortgages to the Public in
addition to the money capital of the Bank.

BUT the doubt is that the Bank will not be induced to accept the opportunity.
The Bank has existed five years and has not purchased a shilling of real
property: and as such property or estates can not be purchased by the Bank but
with the interest money which the stock produces, and as that is divided every
half year among the stockholders, and each stockholder chooses to have the
management of his own dividend, and if he lays it out in purchasing an estate
to have that estate his own private property, and under his own immediate
management, there is no expectation, so far from being any fear, that the
Clause will be accepted.

WHERE knowledge is a duty, ignorance is a crime; and the Committee are
criminal in not understanding this subject better. Had this Clause not been in
the Charter, the Committee might have rep^rted the want of it as a defect, in
not empowering the Bank to hold estates as a real security to its creditors:
but as the complaint now stands, the accusation of it is, that the Charter
empowers the Bank to give real security to as creditors. A complaint never
made, heard of, or thought of before.

THE second article in this paragraph is, That the Bank according to the tenor
of the present Charter is to exist for ever -- Here I agree with the Committee,
and am glad to find that among such a list of errors and contradictions there
is one idea which is not wrong, although the Committee have made a wrong use of
it.

As we are not to ^ive for ever ourselves, and other generations are to follow
^s, we have neither the power nor the right to govern them, or to say how they
shall govern themselves. It is the summit of human vanity, and shows a
covetousness of power beyond the grave, to be dictating to the world to come.
It is sufficient that we do that which is right ^n our own day and leave them
with the advantage of good ^x^mples.

As the generations o^ the world are every day both commencing and expiring,
therefore, when any public Act of this sort is done it naturally supposes the
age of that generation to be then beginning, and the time contained between
coming of age, and the natural end of life, in the extent of time it has a
right to go to, which may be about thirty years; for though many may die before,
others will live beyond; and the mean time is equally sair for all generations.

IF it was made an article in the Constitution, that all laws and Acts should
cease of themselves in thirty years, and have no legal force beyond that time,
it would prevent their becoming too numerous and voluminous, and serve to keep
them within view and in a compact compass. Such as were proper to be continued,
would be enacted again, and those which were not, would go into oblivion. There
is the same propriety that a nation should fix a time for a full settlement of
its affairs, and begin again from a new date, as that an individual should, and
to keep within the distance of thirty years would be a convenient period.

THE British, from the want of some general regulation of this kind, have a
great number of obsolete laws; which, though out of use and forgot, are not out
of force, and are occasionally brought up for sharping purposes, and innocent
unwary persons trepanned thereby.

To extend this idea still further, -- it would probably be a considerable
improvement in the political system of nations, to make all treaties of peace
for a limited time. It is the nature of the mind to feel uneasy under the idea
of a condition perpetually existing over it, and to excite in itself
apprehensions that would not take place were it not from that cause.

WERE treaties of peace made for, and renewable every, seven or ten years, the
natural effect would be, to make peace continue longer than it does under the
custom of making peace for ever. If the parties felt or apprehended any
inconveniences under the terms already made, they would look forward to the
time when they should be eventually relieved therefrom, and might renew the
treaty on improved conditions. This opportunity periodically occurring, and the
recollection of it always existing, would serve as a chimney to the political
fabric, to carry off the smoke and fume of national fire. It would naturally
abate, and honorably take off, the edge and occasion for fighting; and however
the parties might determine to do it, when the time of the treaty should
expire, it would then seem like fighting in cool blood: The fighting temper
would be dissipated before the fighting time arrived, and negotiation supply
its place. To know how probable this may be, a man need do no more than observe
the progress of his own mind on any private circumstance similar in its nature
to a public one. -- But to return to my subject --

To give Limitation is to give Duration: and though it is not a justifying
reason, that because an Act or Contract is not to last for ever, that it shall
be broken or violated to day, yet, where no time is mentioned, the omission
affords an opportunity for the abuse. When we violate a contract on this
pretense, we assume a right that belongs to the next generation; for though they,
as a following generation, have the right of altering or setting it aside, as
not being concerned in the making it, or not being done in their day, we, who
made it, have not that right; and, therefore, the Committee, in this part of
their report, have made a wrong use of a right principle; and as this Clause in
the Charter might have been altered by the consent of the parties, it cannot be
produced to justify the violation. -- And were it not altered there would be no
inconvenience from it. The term "for ever" is an absurdity that would have no
effect. The next age will think for itself by the same rule of right that we
have done, and not admit any assumed authority of ours to encroach upon the
system of their day. Our for ever ends where their for ever begins.

THE third article in this paragraph is, that the Bank holds its Charter
without being obliged to yield any emolument to the Government.

INGRATITUDE has a short memory. It was on the failure of the Government, to
support the Public Cause, that the Bank originated. It stepped in as a support
when some of the persons then in the Government, and who now oppose the Bank,
were apparently on the point of abandoning the cause, not from disaffection,
but from despair. While the expenses of the war were carried on by emissions of
continental money, any set of men, in Government, might carry it on. The means
being provided to their hands, required no great exertions of fortitude or
wisdom: but when this means failed, they would have failed with it, had not a
public spirit awakened itself with energy out of doors. It was easy times to
the Governments while continental money lasted. The dream of wealth supplied
the reality of it; but when the dream vanished, the Government did not awake.

BUT what right has the Government to expect any emolument from the Bank? Does
the Committee mean to set up Acts and Charters for sale, or what do they mean?
Because it is the practice of the British Ministry to grind a toll out of every
public institution they can get a power over, is the same practice to be
followed here?

THE war being now ended, and the Bank having rendered the service expected, or
rather hoped for, from it, the principal public use of it, at this time, is for
the promotion and extension of commerce. The whole community derives benefit
from the operation of the Bank. It facilitates the commerce of the country. It
quickens the means of purchasing and paying for country-produce, and hastens on
the exportation of it. The emolument, therefore, being to the Community, it is
the office and duty of Government to give protection to the Bank.

AMONG many of the principal conveniences arising from the Bank, one of them
is, that it gives a kind of life to, what would otherwise be, dead money, Every
merchant and person in trade, has always in his hands some quantity of cash,
which constantly remains with him; that is, he is never entirely without: This
remnant money, as it may be called, is of no use to him till more is collected
to it. He can neither buy produce nor merchandise with it, and this being the
case with every person in trade, there will be (though not all at the same) as
many of those sums lying uselessly by, and scattered throughout the city, as
there are persons in trade, besides many that are not in trade.

I SHOULD not suppose the estimation overrated, in conjecturing, that half the
money in the city, at any one time, lies in this manner. By collecting those
scattered sums together, which is done by means of the Bank, they become
capable of being used, and the quantity of circulating cash is doubled, and by
the depositors alternately lending them to each other, the commercial system is
invigorated; and as it is the interest of the Bank to preserve this money in
the country for domestic uses only, and as it has the best opportunity of doing
so, the Bank serves as a sentinel over the specie.

IF a farmer, or a miller, comes to the city with produce, there are but few
merchants that can individually purchase it with ready money of their own; and
those few would command nearly the whole market for country produce: But, by
means of the Bank, this monopoly is prevented, and the chance of the market
enlarged. It is very extraordinary that the late Assembly should promote
monopolizing; yet such would be the effect of suppressing the Bank; and it is
much to the honor of those merchants, who are capable, by their fortunes, of
becoming monopolizers, that they support the Bank. In this case, honor operates
over interest. They were the persons who first set up the Bank, and their honor
is now engaged to support what it is their interest to put down.

IF merchants, by this means, or farmers, by similar means, among themselves,
can mutually aid and support each other, what has the Government to do with it?
What right has it to expect emolument from associated industry, more than from
individual industry? It would be a strange sort of a Government, that should
make it illegal for people to assist each other, or pay a tribute for doing so.

BUT the truth is, that the Government has already derived emoluments, and very
extraordinary ones. It has already received its full share, by the services of
the Bank during the war; and it is every day receiving benefits, because
whatever promotes and facilitates commerce, serves likewise to promote and
facilitate the revenue.

THE last article in this paragraph is. That the Bank is not the least
dependent on the Government.

HAVE the Committee so soon forgot the principles of Republican Government and
the Constitution, or are so little acquainted with them, as not to know, that
this article in their Report partakes of the nature of treason? Do they not
know, that freedom is destroyed by dependence, and the safety of the State
endangered thereby? Do they not see, that to hold any part of the citizens of
the State, as yearly pensioners on the favor of an Assembly, is striking at the
root of free elections? If other parts of their Report discover a want of
knowledge on the subject of Banks, this shows a want of principle in the
science of Government.

ONLY let us suppose this dangerous idea carried into practice, and then see
what it leads to. If corporate Bodies are, after their incorporation, to be
annually dependent on an Assembly for the continuance of their Charter, the
citizens, which compose those corporations, are not free. The Government holds
an authority and influence over them, in a manner different from what it does
over other citizens, and by this means destroys that equality of freedom, which
is the bulwark of the Republic and the Constitution.

BY this scheme of Government any party, which happens to be uppermost in a
State, will command all the corporations in it, and may create more for the
purpose of extending that influence. The dependent Borough-Towns in England are
the rotten part of their Government, and this idea of the Committee has a very
near relation to it.

"If you do not do so and so," expressing what was meant, "take care of your
Charter," was a threat thrown out against the Bank. But as I do not wish to
enlarge on a disagreeable circumstance, and hope that what is already said, is
sufficient to show the Anti-Constitutional conduct and principles of the
Committee, I shall pass on to the next paragraph in the Report. -- Which is --

THAT the great profits of the Bank, which will daily increase as money grows
scarcer, and which already far exceed the profits of European Banks, have
tempted foreigners to vest their money in this Bank, and thus to draw from us
large sums for interest.

HAD the Committee understood the subject, some dependence might be put on
their opinion which now cannot. Whether money will grow scarcer, and whether
the profits of the Bank will increase, are more than the Committee know, or are
judges sufficient to guess at. The Committee are not so capable of taking care
of commerce, as commerce is capable of taking care of itself. The farmer
understands farming, and the merchant understands commerce; and as riches are
equally the object of both, there is no occasion that either should fear that
the other will seek to be poor, The more money the merchant has, so much the
better for the farmer, who has produce to sell: and the richer the farmer is,
so much the better for the merchant, when he comes to his store.

As to the profits of the Bank, the stockholders must take their chance for it.
It may some years be more and others less, and upon the whole may not be so
productive as many other ways that money may be employed. It is the convenience
which the stockholders, as commercial men, derive from the establishment of the
Bank, and not the mere interest they receive, that is the inducement to them.
It is the ready opportunity of borrowing alternately of each other that forms
the principal object: And as they pay as well as receive a great part of the
interest among themselves, it is nearly the same thing, both cases considered
at once, whether it is more or less.

THE stockholders are occasionally depositors and sometimes borrowers of the
Bank. They pay interest for what they borrow, and receive none for what they
deposit; and were a stockholder to keep a nice account of the interest he pays
for the one and loses upon the other, he would find, at the year's end, that
ten per cent upon his stock would probably not be more than common interest
upon the whole, if so much.

As to the Committee complaining that foreigners by vesting their money in the
Bank will draw large sums from us for interest, it is like a miller complaining
in a dry season, that so much water runs into his Dam that some of it runs over.

COULD those foreigners draw this interest without putting in any capital the
complaint would be well founded; but as they must first put money in before
they can draw any out, and as they must draw many years before they can draw
even the numerical sum they put in at first, the effect, for at least twenty
years to come, will be directly contrary to what the Committee states: Because
we draw capitals from them and they only interest from us, and as we shall have
the use of the money all the while it remains with us, the advantage will
always be in our favor. -- In framing this part of the Report, the Committee
must have forgot which side of the Atlantic they were on, for the case would be
as they state it if we put money into their Bank instead of they putting it
into ours.

I HAVE now gone through, line by line, every objection against the Bank,
contained in the first half of the Report; what follows may be called, The
Lamentations of the Committee, and a lamentable pusillanimous degrading affair
it is -- It is a public affront, a reflection upon the sense and spirit of the
whole country. I shall give the remainder together as it stands in the Report,
and then my remarks.

THE Lamentations are That foreigners will doubtless less be more and more
induced to become stockholders, until the time may arrive when this enormous
engine of power may become subject to foreign influence, this country may be
agitated by the politics of European Courts, and the good people of America
reduced once more into a state of subordination and dependence upon some one or
other of the European Powers. That at best, if it were even confined to the
hands of Americans, it would be totally destructive of that equality which
ought to prevail in a Republic. We have nothing in our free and equal
Government capable of balancing the influence which this Bank must create; and
we see nothing which in the course of a few years can prevent the Directors of
the Bank from governing Pensylvania. Already we have felt its influence
indirectly interfering in the measures of the Legislature. Already the House of
Assembly, the representatives of the people, have been threatened, that the
credit of our paper currency will be blasted by the Bank; and if this growing
evil continues, we fear the time is not very distant when the Bank will be able
to dictate to the Legislature, what laws to pass and what to forbear.

WHEN the sky falls we shall be all killed. There is something so ridiculously
grave, so wide of probability, and so wild, confused and inconsistent in the
whole composition of this long paragraph that I am at a loss how to begin upon
it. -- It is like a drowning man crying fire! fire!

THIS part of the Report is made up of two dreadful predictions. The first is,
that if foreigners purchase Bank stock we shall be all ruined: -- The second
is, that if the Americans keep the Bank to themselves we shall be also ruined.

A COMMITTEE of fortune tellers is a novelty in Government; and the Gentlemen
by giving this specimen of their art, have ingeniously saved their honor on one
point, which is, that though people may say they are not Bankers, nobody can say
they are not Conjurers. -- There is, however, one consolation left, which is,
that the Committee do not know exactly how long it may be; so there is some
hope that we may all be in heaven when this dreadful calamity happens upon
earth.

BUT to be serious, if any seriousness is necessary on so laughable a subject.
-- If the state should think there is any thing improper in foreigners
purchasing Bank stock, or any other kind of stock or funded property, (for I
see no reason why Bank stock should be particularly pointed at) the Legislature
have authority to prohibit it. It is a mere political opinion that has nothing
to do with the Charter or the Charter with that; and therefore the first
dreadful prediction vanishes.

IT has always been a maxim in politics founded on, and drawn from, natural
causes and consequences, that the more foreign countries which any nation can
interest in the prosperity of its own so much the better. Where the treasure is
there will the heart be also; and therefore when foreigners vest their money
with us, they naturally invest their good wishes with it, and it is we that
obtain an influence over them, not they over us. -- But the Committee sat out
so very wrong at first that the further they traveled the more they were out
of their way; and now they are got to the end of their Report they are at the
utmost distance from their business.

As to the second dreadful part, that of the Bank overturning the Government,
perhaps the Committee meant that at the next general election themselves might
be turned out of it, which has partly been the case; not by the influence of
the Bank, for it had none, not even enough to obtain the permission of a
hearing from Government, but by the influence of reason and the choice of the
people, who most probably resent the undue and unconstitutional influence which
that House and the Committee were assuming over the privileges of citizenship.

THE Committee might have been so modest as to have confined themselves to the
Bank, and not thrown a general odium on the whole country. Before the events
can happen which the Committee predict, the electors of Pennsylvania must
become dupes, dunces and cowards, and therefore when the Committee predict the
dominion of the Bank they predict the disgrace of the people.

THE Committee having finished their Report proceed to give their advice, which
is,

That a Committee be appointed to bring in a bill to repeal the Act of Assembly
passed the first day of April 1782, entitled, "An Act to incorporate the
subscribers to the Bank of North America," and also to repeal one other Act of
the Assembly passed the 18th of March 1782, entitled, "An Act for preventing
and punishing the counterfeiting of the common seal, Bank bills, and Bank notes
of the President, Directors and Company of the Bank of North America, and for
other purposes therein mentioned.

THERE is something in this sequel to the Report that is perplexed and obscure.

HERE are two Acts to be repealed. One is, the incorporating Act. -- The other,
the Act for preventing and punishing the counterfeiting of the common seal,
Bank bills, and Bank notes of the President, Directors and Company of the Bank
of North America.

IT would appear from the Committee's manner of arranging them, (were it not
for the difference of their dates) that the Act for punishing the
counterfeiting the common seal, etc. of the Bank, followed the Act of
incorporation, and that the common seal there referred to is a common seal
which the Bank held in consequence of the aforesaid incorporating Act. -- But
the case is quite otherwise. The Act for punishing the counterfeiting the
common seal, etc. the Bank, was passed prior to the incorporating Act, and
refers to the common seal which the Bank held in consequence of the Charter of
Congress, and the style which the Act expresses, of President, Directors and
Company of the Bank of North America, is the corporate style which the Bank
derives under the Congress Charter.

THE punishing Act, therefore, has two distinct legal points. The one is, an
authoritative public recognition of the Charter of Congress. The second is, the
punishment it inflicts on counterfeiting.

THE Legislature may repeal the punishing part but it cannot undo the
recognition, because no repealing Act can say that the State has not
recognized. The recognition is a mere matter of fact, and no law or Act can
undo a fact or put it, if I may so express it, in the condition it was before
it existed. The repealing Act therefore does not reach the full point the
Committee had in view; for even admitting it to be a repeal of the State
Charter, it still leaves another Charter recognized in its stead. -- The
Charter of Congress, standing merely on itself, would have a doubtful
authority, but the recognition of it by the State gives it legal ability. The
repealing Act, it is true, sets aside the punishment but does not bar the
operation of the Charter of Congress as a Charter recognized by the State, and
therefore the Committee did their business but by halves.

I HAVE now gone entirely through the Report of the Committee, and a more
irrational inconsistent contradictory Report will scarcely be found on the
journals of any Legislature in America.

HOW the repealing Act is to be applied, or in what manner it is to operate, is
a matter yet to be determined. For admitting a question of law to arise,
whether the Charter, which that Act attempts to repeal, is a law of the land in
the manner which laws of universal operation are, or of the nature of a
contract made between the Public and the Bank (as I have already explained in
this work) the repealing Act does not and cannot decide the question, because
it is the repealing Act that makes the question, and its own fate is involved
in the decision. It is a question of law and not a question of legislation, and
must be decided on in a court of justice and not by a House of Assembly.

BUT the repealing Act by being passed prior to the decision of this point
assumes the power of deciding it, and the Assembly in so doing erects itself
unconstitutionally into a tribunal of judicature, and absorbs the authority and
right of the courts of justice into itself.

THEREFORE the operation of the repealing Act, in its very outset, requires
injustice to be done. For it is impossible on the principles of a republican
government and the Constitution, to pass an Act to forbid any of the citizens
the right of appealing to the courts of justice on any matter in which his
interest or property is affected; but the first operation of this Act goes to
shut up the courts of justice, and holds them subservient to the Assembly It
either commands or influences them not to hear the case, or to give judgment on
it on the mere will of one party only.

I WISH the citizens to awaken themselves on this subject. -- Not because the
Bank is concerned, but because their own constitutional rights and privileges
are involved in the event. It is a question of exceeding great magnitude; for
if an Assembly is to have this power the laws of the land and the courts of
justice are but of little use.

HAVING now finished with the Report, I proceed to the third and last subject
-- that of Paper-Money. --

I REMEMBER a German farmer expressing as much in a few words as the whole
subject requires: Money is Money and Paper is Paper. -- All the invention of
man cannot make them otherwise. The alchymist may cease his labors, and the
hunter after the philosopher's stone go to rest, if paper can be metamorphosed
into gold and silver, or made to answer the same purpose in all cases.

GOLD and silver are the emissions of nature; paper is the emission of art. The
value of gold and silver is ascertained by the quantity which nature has made
in the earth. We cannot make that quantity more or less than it is, and
therefore the value being dependent upon the quantity, depends not on man. --
Man has no share in making gold or silver; all that his labors and ingenuity
can accomplish is, to collect it from the mine, refine it for use and give it
an impression, or stamp it into coin.

ITS being stamped into coin adds considerably to its convenience but nothing
to its value. It has then no more value than it had before. Its value is not in
the impression but in itself. Take away the impression and still the same value
remains. Alter it as you will, or expose it to any misfortune that can happen,
still the value is not diminished. It has a capacity to resist the accidents
that destroy other things. It has, therefore, all the requisite qualities that
money can have, and is a fit material to make money of; and nothing, which has
not all those properties, can be fit for the purpose of money.

PAPER, considered as a material whereof to make money, has none of the
requisite qualities in it. It is too plentiful, and too easily come at. It can
be had any where, and for a trifle.

THERE are two ways in which I shall consider paper.

THE only proper use for paper, in the room of money, is to write promissory
notes and obligations of payment in specie upon. A piece of paper, thus written
and signed, is worth the sum it is given for, if the person who gives it is
able to pay it; because, in this case, the law will oblige him. But if he is
worth nothing, the paper-note is worth nothing. The value, therefore, of such a
note, is not in the note itself, for that is but paper and promise, but in the
man who is obliged to redeem it with gold or silver.

PAPER, circulating in this manner, and for this purpose, continually points to
the place and person where, and of whom, the money is to be had, and at last
finds its home; and, as it were, unlocks its master's chest and pays the bearer.

BUT when an Assembly undertake to issue paper as money, the whole system of
safety and certainty is overturned, and property set afloat. Paper-notes given
and taken between individuals as a promise of payment is one thing, but paper
issued by an Assembly as money is another thing. It is like putting an
apparition in the place of a man; it vanishes with looking at and nothing
remains but the air.

MONEY, when considered as the fruit of many years industry, as the reward of
labor, sweat and toil, as the widow's dowry and the childrens portion, and as
the means of procuring the necessaries, and alleviating the afflictions of
life, and making old age a scene of rest, has something in it sacred that is
not to be sported with, or trusted to the airy bubble of paper-currency.

BY what power or authority an Assembly undertake to make paper-money is
difficult to say. It derives none from the Constitution, for that is silent on
the subject. It is one of those things which the people have not delegated, and
which, were they at any time assembled together, they would not delegate. It
is, therefore, an assumption of power which an Assembly is not warranted in,
and which may, one day or other, be the means of bringing some of them to
punishment.

I SHALL enumerate some of the evils of paper-money and conclude with offering
means for preventing them.

ONE of the evils of paper-money is, that it turns the whole country into
stock-jobbers. The precariousness of its value and the uncertainty of its fate
continually operate, night and day, to produce this destructive effect. Having
no real value in itself it depends for support upon accident, caprice and
party, and as it is the interest of some to depreciate and of others to raise
its value, there is a continual invention going on that destroys the morals of
the country.

IT was horrid to see and hurtful to recollect how loose the principles of
justice were let by means of the paperemissions during the war. The experience
then had should be a warning to any Assembly how they venture to open such a
dangerous door again.

As to the romantic if not hypocritical tale, that a virtuous people need no
gold and silver and that paper will do as well, requires no other contradiction
than the experience we have seen. Though some well-meaning people may be
inclined to view it in this light, it is certain that the sharper always talks
this language.

THERE are a set of men who go about making purchases upon credit, and buying
estates they have not wherewithal to pay for; and having done this, their next
step is to fill the newspapers with paragraphs of the scarcity of money and
the necessity of a paper-emission, then to have it made a legal tender under
the pretense of supporting its credit; and when out, to depreciate it as fast
as they can, get a deal of it for a little price and cheat their creditors; and
this is the concise history of Paper-money schemes.

BUT why since the universal custom of the world has established money as the
most convenient medium of traffic and commerce, should paper be set up in
preference to gold and silver? The productions of nature are surely as innocent
as those of art; and in the case of money, are abundantly, if not infinitely,
more so. The love of gold and silver may produce covetousness, but
covetousness, when not connected with dishonesty, is not properly a vice. It is
frugality run to an extreme.

BUT the evils of paper-money have no end. Its uncertain and fluctuating value
is continually awakening or creating new schemes of deceit. Every principle of
justice is put to the rack and the bond of society dissolved: The suppression
therefore of paper-money might very properly have been put into the Act for
preventing Vice and Immorality.

THE pretense for paper-money has been, that there was not a sufficiency of
gold and silver. This, so far from being a reason for paper-emissions, is a
reason against them.

As gold and silver are not the productions of North America, they are,
therefore, articles of importation; and if we set up a paper-manufactory of
money, it amounts, as far as it is able, to prevent the importation of Hard
money, or to send it out again as fast as it comes in; and by following this
practice we shall continually banish the specie, till we have none left, and be
continually complaining of the grievance instead of remedying the cause.

CONSIDERING gold and silver as articles of importation, there will in time,
unless we prevent it by paper-emissions, be as much in the country as the
occasions of it require, for the same reasons there are as much of other
imported articles. But as every yard of cloth manufactured in the country
occasions a yard the less to be imported, so it is by money, with this
difference, that in the one case we manufacture the thing itself and in the
other we do not. We have cloth for cloth, but we have only paper-dollars for
silver ones.

As to the assumed authority of any Assembly in making paper-money, or paper of
any kind, a legal tender, or in other language, a compulsive payment, it is a
most presumptuous attempt at arbitrary power. There can be no such power in a
Republican government: The people have no freedom, and property no security
where this practice and be acted: And the Committee who shall bring in a report
for this purpose, or the Member who moves for it, and he who seconds it merit
impeachment, and sooner or later may expect it.

OF all the various sorts of base coin, paper-money is the basest. It has the
least intrinsic value of any thing that can be put in the place of gold and
silver. A hobnail or a piece of wampum far exceeds it. And there would be more
propriety in making those articles a legal tender than to make paper so.

IT was the issuing base coin and establishing it as a tender, that was one of
the principal means of finally overthrowing the power of the Stewart family in
Ireland. The article is worth reciting as it bears such a resemblance to the
progress practiced on paper-money.

Brass and copper of the basest kind, old cannon, broken bells, household
utensils were assiduously collected; and from every pound weight of such vile
materials, valued at four-pence, pieces were coined and circulated to the
amount of five pounds nominal value. By the first proclamation they were made
current in all payments to and from the King and the subjects of the realm,
except in duties on the importation of foreign goods, money left in trust, or
due by mortgage, bills or bonds; and James promised that when the money should
be decried, he would receive it in all payments or make full satisfaction in
gold and silver. The nominal value was afterward raised by subsequent
proclamations, the original restrictions removed, and this base money was
ordered to be received in all kinds of payments. As brass and copper grew
scarce it was made of still viler materials, of tin and pewter, and old debts
of one thousand pounds were discharged by pieces of vile metal, amounting to
thirty shillings in intrinsic value. Leland's history of Ireland, vol. iv, page
265.
-- Had King James thought of paper he needed not to have been at the trouble
or expense of collecting brass and copper, broken bells and household utensils.

THE laws of a country ought to be the standard of equity, and calculated to
impress on the mind of the people the moral as well as the legal obligation of
reciprocal justice. But tender-laws, of any kind, operate to destroy morality,
and to dissolve by the pretense of law what ought to be the principle of law to
support, reciprocal justice between man and man: And the punishment of a member
who should move for such a law ought to be DEATH.

WHEN the recommendation of Congress in the year 1780 for repealing the
tender-laws was before the Assembly of Pennsylvania, on casting up the votes,
for and against bringing in a bill to repeal those laws, the numbers were
equal, and the casting vote rested on the Speaker, Colonel Bayard. I give my
vote said he, for the repeal from a consciousness of justice; the tender-laws
operate to establish iniquity by law. -- But when the Bill was brought in, the
House rejected it, and the tender-laws continued to be the means of fraud.

IF any thing had, or could have, a value equal to gold and silver it would
require no tender-law; and if it had not that value it ought not to have such a
law; and, therefore, all tender-laws are tyrannical and unjust, and calculated
to support fraud and oppression.

MOST of the advocates for tender-laws are those who have debts to discharge,
and who take refuge in such a law, to violate their contracts and cheat their
creditors. But as no law can warrant the doing an unlawful act, therefore, the
proper mode of proceeding, should any such laws be enacted in future, will be
to impeach and execute the Members who moved for and seconded such a Bill, and
put the debtor and the creditor in the same situation they were in, with
respect to each other, before such a law was passed. Men ought to be made to
tremble at the idea of such a barefaced act of injustice. It is in vain to talk
of restoring credit, or to complain that money cannot be borrowed at legal
interest, until every idea of tender-laws is totally and publicly reprobated
and extirpated from among us.

As to paper-money, in any light it can be viewed, it is at best a bubble.
Considered as property it is inconsistent to suppose that the breath of an
Assembly, whose authority expires with the year, can give to paper the value
and duration of gold. They cannot even engage that the next Assembly shall
receive it in taxes. And by the precedent (for authority there is none) that
any one Assembly makes paper-money, another may do the same, until confidence
and credit are totally expelled, and all the evils of depreciation acted over
again. The amount, therefore, of Paper-Money is this, That it is the
illegitimate offspring of Assemblies, and when their year expire they leave it
a vagrant on the hands of the Public.

HAVING now gone through the three subjects proposed in the title to this work, I
shall conclude with offering some thoughts on the present affairs of the State.

MY idea of a single Legislature was always founded on a hope, that whatever
personal parties there might be in the State, they would all unite and agree in
the general principles of good government -- that these party differences would
be dropped at the threshold of the state-house, and that the Public Good or the
good of the whole, would be the governing principle of the Legislature within
it.

PARTY dispute, taken on this ground, would only be, who should have the honor
of making the laws; not what the laws should be. But when party operates to
produce party laws, a single House is a single person, and subject to the
haste, rashness and passion of individual sovereignty. At least, it is an
aristocracy.

THE form of the present Constitution is now made to trample on its principles,
and the constitutional Members are anti-constitutional Legislators. They are
fond of supporting the form for the sake of the power, and they dethrone the
principle to display the scepter.

THE attack of the late Assembly on the Bank discovers such a want of
moderation and prudence, of impartiality and equity, of fair and candid enquiry
and investigation, of deliberate and unbiassed judgment, and such a rashness of
thinking and vengeance of power as is inconsistent with the safety of the
Republic. It was judging without hearing and execution without trial.

BY such rash, injudicious and violent proceedings the interest of the State is
weakened, its prosperity diminished and its commerce and its specie banished to
other places. -- Suppose the Bank had not been in an immediate condition to
have stood such a sudden attack, what a scene of instant distress would the
rashness of that Assembly have brought upon this city and State. The holders of
Bank-notes, whoever they might be, would have been thrown into the utmost
confusion and difficulties. It is no apology to say the House never thought of
this, for it was their duty to have thought of every thing.

BUT by the prudent and provident management of the Bank (though unsuspicious of
the attack) it was enabled to stand the run upon it without stopping payment a
moment, and to prevent the evils and mischiefs taking place which the rashness
of the Assembly had a direct tendency to bring on; a trial that scarcely a Bank
in Europe, under a similar circumstance, could have stood through.

I CANNOT see reason sufficient to believe that the hope of the House to put
down the Bank was placed on the withdrawing the Charter, so much as on the
expectation of producing a bankruptey on the Bank, by starting a run upon it.
If this was any part of their project it was a very wicked one, because
hundreds might have been ruined to gratify a party-spleen.

BUT this not being the case, what has the attack amounted to, but to expose
the weakness, and rashness, the want of judgment as well as justice, of those
who made it, and to confirm the credit of the Bank more substantially than it
was before.

THE attack, it is true, has had one effect, which is not in the power of the
Assembly to remedy, it has banished many thousand hard dollars from the state.
-- By the means of the Bank, Pennsylvania had the use of a great deal of hard
money belonging to citizens of other States, and that without any interest, for
it laid here in the nature of a deposit, the depositors taking Bank-notes in
its stead. But the alarm called those notes in and the owners drew out their
cash.

THE banishing the specie served to make room for the paper-money of the
Assembly, and we have now paper dollars where we might have had silver ones. So
that the effect of the paper-money has been to make less money in the state
than there was before. Paper-money is like dram-drinking, it relieves for the
moment by a deceitful sensation, but gradually diminishes the natural heat, and
leaves the body worse than it found it. Were not this the case, and could money
be made of paper at pleasure, every Sovereign in Europe would be as rich as he
pleased. But the truth is, that it is a bubble and the attempt vanity. Nature
has provided the proper materials for money, gold and silver, and any attempt
of ours to rival her is ridiculous.

BUT to conclude -- If the Public will permit the opinion of a friend who is
attached to no party, and under obligations to none, nor at variance with any,
and who through a long habit of acquaintance with them has never ceceived them,
that opinion shall be f^eely given.

THE Bank is an Institution capable of being made exceedingly benesicial to the
State, not only as the means of extending and facilitating its commerce, but as
a means of increasing the quantity of hard money in the State. The Assembly's
paper-money serves directly to banish or crowd out the hard, because it is
issued as money and put in the place of hard money. But Bank notes are of a
very different kind, and produce a contrary effect. They are promissory notes
payable on demand, and may be taken to the Bank and exchanged for gold or
silver without the least ceremony or difficulty.

THE Bank, therefore, is obliged to keep a constant stock of hard money
sufficient for this purpose; which is what the Assembly neither does, nor can
do by their paper; because the quantity of hard money collected by taxes into
the Treasury is trisling compared with the quantity that circulates in trade
and through the Bank.

THE method, therefore, to increase the quantity of hard money would be to
combine the security of the Government and the Bank into one. And instead of
issuing paper-money that serves to banish the specie, to borrow the sum wanted
of the Bank in Bank-notes on the condition of the Bank exchanging those notes
at stated periods and quantities with hard money.

PAPER issued in this manner, and directed to this end, would, instead of
banishing, work itself into, gold and siver; because it will then be both the
advantage and duty of the Bank, and of all the mercantile interest connected
with it, to procure and import gold and silver from any part of the world it
can be got, to exchange the notes with. The English Bank is restricted to the
dealing in no other articles of importation than gold and silver, and we may
make the same use of our Bank if we proceed properly with it.

THOSE notes will then have a double security, that of the Government and that
of the Bank; and they will not be issued as money, but as hostages to be
exchanged for hard money, and will, therefore, work the contrary way to what
the paper of the Assembly, uncombined with the security of the Bank, produces:
And the interest allowed the Bank will be saved to Government by a saving of
the expenses and charges attending paperemissions.

IT is, as I have already observed in the course of this work, the harmony of
all the parts of a Republic, that constitutes their several and mutual good. A
Government, that is constructed only to govern, is not a Republican Government.
It is combining authority with usefulness that in a great measure distinguishes
the Republican system from others.

PAPER-MONEY appears, at first sight, to be a great saving, or rather that it
costs nothing; but it is the dearest money there is. The ease with which it is
emitted by an Assembly at first, serves as a trap to catch people in at last.
It operates as an anticipation of the next year's taxes. If the money
depreciates, after it is out, it then, as I have already remarked, has the
effect of fluctuating stock, and the people become stock-jobbers to throw the
loss on each other. -- If it does not depreciate, it is then to be sunk by
taxes at the price of hard money; because the same quantity of produce, or
goods, that would procure a paper-dollar to pay taxes with would procure a
stiver one for the same purpose. Therefore in any case of paper-money it is
dearer to the country than hard money by all the expense which the paper,
printing, signing and other attendant charges come to, and at last goes into
the fire.

SUPPOSE one hundred thousand dollars in paper-money to be emitted every year
by the Assembly, and the same sum to be sunk every year by taxes, there will
then be no more than one hundred thousand dollars out at any one time. If the
expense of paper and printing, and of persons to attend the press while the
sheets are striking on, signers, etc. be five per cent. it is evident that in
the course of twenty years emissions, the one hundred thousand dollars will
cost the country two hundred thousand dollars. Because the papermaker's and
printer's bills, and the expense of supervisors and signers, and other
attendant charges, will in that time amount to as much as the money amounts to;
for the successive emissions are but a recoinage of the same sum.

BUT gold and silver require to be coined but once, and will last a hundred
years, better than paper will one year, and at the end of that time be still
gold and silver. Therefore the saving to Government, in combining its all and
security with that of the Bank in procuring hard money, will be an advantage to
both, and to the whole community.

THE case to be provided against, after this, will be, that the Government do
not borrow too much of the Bank, nor the Bank lend more notes than it can
redeem; and, therefore, should any thing of this kind be under^^^^ the best way
will be to begin with a moderate sum, (...). The (...) given the Bank operates
as a bounty on the importation of hard money and which may not be more than the
money expended i^ making paper-emissions.

BUT nothing of this kind, nor any other public under taking, that requires
security and duration beyond the year, can be gone upon under the present mode
of co^ducting Government. The late Assembly, by assumir a sovereign power over
every Act and matter done by the State in former Assemblies, and thereby
setting up a pre cedent of overhauling and overturning, as the accident o^
elections shall happen or party prevail, have rendered Government incompetent
to all the great objects of the State. They have eventually reduced the Public
to a^ annual body like themselves; whereas the Public are standing permanent
body, holding annual elections.

THERE are several great improvements and under takings, such as inland
navigation, building bridges opening roads of communication through the State,
and other matters of a public benefit, that might be gone upon, but which now
cannot, until this governmental error or defect is remedied. The faith of
Government, under the present mode of conducting it, cannot be relied on.
Individuals will not venture their money, in undertakings of this kind, on an
Act that may be made by one Assembly and broken by another. When a man can say
that he cannot trust the Government, the importance and dignity of the Public
is diminished, sapped and undermined; and, therefore, it becomes the Public to
restore their own honor, by setting these matters to rights.

PERHAPS this cannot be effectually done until the time of the next Convention,
when the principles, on which they are to be regulated and fixed, may be made a
part of the Constitution.

In the mean time the Public may keep their affairs in sufficient good order,
by substituting prudence in the place of authority, and electing men into the
Government, who will at once throw aside the narrow prejudices of party, and
make the Good of the Whole the ruling object of their conduct -- And with this
hope, and a sincere wish for their prosperity, I close my book.


