MEMOIRS OF MAJOR GENERAL HEATH. CONTAINING ANECDOTES, DETAILS of SKIRMISHES,
BATTLES, and other MILITARY EVENTS, DURING THE AMERICAN WAR. WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

Published according to Act of Congress.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, FAUST'S STATUE, No. 45,
NEWBURY-STREET. Sold by them; by I. THOMAS, Worcester; by THOMAS, ANDREWS and
PENNIMAN, Albany; by THOMAS, ANDREWS and BUTLER, Baltimore; and by the
Booksellers throughout the Continent. AUG. 1798.

Advertisement.
IT was not the intention, to publish the Memoirs during the lifetime of the
writer. They were penned for his own review, and the information and
satisfaction of his own family, as well as posterity: If any should think their
present publication in any respects relative to himself as too ostentatious,
candor, it is presumed, will decide that there is no alternative, unless the
Memoirs are mutilated in facts, or denied at present a publication. The
pressing importunity of very many is the sole reason of their appearance at
this time.

SUCH of the facts as happened under the observation, or within the immediate
knowledge of the writer, have been impartially narrated: Those which he has
been obliged to collect from other information, have been as faithfully
attempted; but their authenticity cannot be equally vouched for. There are
doubtless many errors. It is the lot of man to be fallible.

THE AUTHOR.

INTRODUCTION.
NATURE seems to have decreed, that not only the minor branches of families,
when they arrive at a proper age of maturity, shall separate from their
parents, and become distinct families; but that Colonies, when they arrive at a
certain degree of population and affluence, shall separate from the mother
State, and become independent and sovereign. Howsoever fit and proper this
economy of nature may be, experience has taught the world, that it has been the
mistaken policy of nations, in almost all ages, to oppose such separations, as
the period approximates, by an impolitic exercise of power, thereby alienating
the affections of the Colonists, and rousing in their breasts those innate
principles of liberty which nature has implanted; (but which, had they not
been awakened by a severity of conduct, would have much longer reposed on the
bosom of a mother, and even have spurned the idea of separation) and have also
made use of armed force, in the most unnatural and cruel manner, to hold in
subjection those by nature in every respect free as themselves. And in the
prosecution of a war thus enkindled, alliances are sought for, and formed, by
both parties, even with those who before were considered as the enemies of
each. This has been exemplified in the conduct of Great Britain toward her
American Colonies, and by the people of the now United States of America, in
their struggle for freedom, and the establishment of independence and
sovereignty.

IT is not the intention of the writer to go into a detail of the first
settlement of this country, or the vicissitudes which have attended it, at
different periods; nor of the rise of the late revolution; as these have
already been attempted by several writers, and probably will hereafter be
further elucidated by other pens.

To preserve and perpetuate a daily Journal of occurrences, through nearly the
whole of the late American war, is the present object. And although the
following pages are not decorated with the flowers of Greece or Rome, and for
their diction cannot claim the patronage of the learned, they contain a state
of facts in detail, which may not be unpleasing to posterity, who will wish, as
much as is possible, to learn from every remaining vestige, the conduct and
successes of their ancestors, in that revolution which laid the foundation of
the independence and sovereignty of their country. To them, therefore, are the
following Memoirs bequeathed, by him who was an eyewitness to many of the
facts which are related, and who collected the others from the best information
the then moment and circumstances would admit.

THAT the United States of America, by their virtue, their wisdom and their
valor, may support and maintain the noble achievements of their ancestors, and
render them still more brilliant, is the earnest wish of their devoted,

Humble Servant, W. HEATH.
ROIBURY, 1798.
MEMOIRS, etc.
MAJOR GENERAL WILLIAM HEATH descended from an ancient family in Roxbury, near
Boston, in Massachusetts, and is of the fifth generation of the family who have
inherited the same real estae, (taken up in a state of nature) not large, but
fertile, and pleasantly situated. He was born March 2d, (old style) 1737, was
brought up a farmer, of which profession he is yet passionately fond. He is of
middling stature, light complexion, very corpulent, and bald-headed, which led
the French officers who served in America, very frequently to compare him to
the Marquis of Granby. Chastellux's Travels.
From his childhood he was remarkably fond of military exercises, which passion
grew up with him, and as he arrived at years of maturity, led him to procure,
and attentively to study, every military treatise in the English language,
which was obtainable. This, with a strong memory, rendered him fully acquainted
with the theory of war in all its branches and duties, from the private
soldier, to the Commander in Chief.

Through the inactive state of the militia company to which he belonged, in the
spring of the year 1765, he went over to Boston, and entered a member of the
Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company. This immediately recommended him to
the notice of the Colonel of the first regiment of militia in the county of
Suffolk, who sent for him, and importuned him to take the command of his own
company; to which Mr. Heath was reluctant; apprehensive that his youth, and
stepping over those who had a better claim, by former office in the company, to
the command of it, might produce an uneasiness. He was, however, commissioned
by Gov. Barnard; and his apprehensions of uneasiness proved to be groundless.

In the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company, he was chosen, and served,
first as Lieutenant, and afterward as Captain.

In the first regiment of the militia of Suffolk, he became the military
favorite of Gov. Barnard, who publicly declared, that he would not only make
him Colonel of the regiment, but, if it were in his power, a General Officer
also.

As the dispute between Great Britain and her American Colonies put on a more
serious aspect, our Captain did not hesitate, for a moment, to declare his
sentiments in favor of the rights and liberties of his fellow-countrymen. This
alarmed Gov. Barnard's apprehensions, but did not alter his open conduct
toward our Captain; though he privately intimated, that if he should promote
him, he might injure the cause of his royal master. It was afterward intimated
to our Captain, that if he was not advanced to the command of the regiment, he
might rest assured, that his feelings would never (during Gov. Barnard's
administration) be hurt by any other officer being promoted over him; which was
verified; Gov. Barnard leaving the province with this regiment unorganized.

Capt. Heath, convinced that the cloud was rapidly gathering, and would
assuredly burst over America, in the beginning of the year 1770, commenced his
addresses to the public, under the signature of A Military Countryman, and
which were occasionally continued until hostilities commenced. In them he urged
the importance of military discipline, and skill in the use of arms, as the
only means, under Heaven, that could save the country from falling a prey to
any daring invader.

Gov. Hutchinson succeeded Gov. Barnard. He organized the first regiment in
Suffolk; and, as might be expected, our Captain had a respite from command.

When it was recommended to the people of Massachusetts, to choose officers
themselves to command them, our Captain was unanimously chosen to take the
command of the first company in the town of Roxbury, (his old and favorite
company;) and on the meeting of the Captains and subalterns of the first
regiment of militia in Suffolk, he was chosen Colonel.

The people of Massachusetts, having determined to support their rights and
liberties at every hazard, (finding that such was the sense of the people of
their sister Colonies) after the dissolution of their General Court, elected a
Provincial Congress. This Congress appointed a Committee of Safety (of whom our
Colonel was one,) vested with executive powers; and another committee, called
the Committee of Supplies. The latter were to purchase military stores,
provisions, etc. and deposit them in such places as the former should direct.
Both committees entered on the duties of their respective functions. The
Provincial Congress voted a sum of money for the purpose of procuring military
stores and provisions; and a quantity of both were collected, and stored in the
town of Concord.

The militia, and the corpse of minute-men, as they were called, (the latter
composed of the young and active) were furnished with officers of their own
choosing. The greatest attention was exhibited by the officers, which was as
cheerfully seconded by the citizen soldiers, to acquire a knowledge of military
duty.

In the month of February, 1775, the Provincial Congress passed the following
resolutions:

In Provincial Congress, Cambridge, February 9th, 1775 -- Resolved, That the
Hon. Jedidiah Prebble, Esquire Hon. Artemas Ward, Esquire Col. Seth Pomeroy, Col. John
Thomas, and Col. William Heath, be, and they hereby are, appointed General
Officers, whose business and duty it shall be, with such and so many of the
militia of this province as shall be assembled by order of the Committee of
Safety, effectually to oppose and resist such attempt or attempts as shall be
made for carrying into execution an act of the British Parliament, entitled,
"An Act for the better regulation of the Government of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay in New England" -- or who shall attempt the carrying into
execution, by force, another act of the British Parliament, entitled, "An Act
for the more impartial administration of justice, in cases of persons
questioned for any act done by them in the execution of the law, or for the
suppression of riots and tumults in the Province of Massachusetts Bay" -- so
long as the said militia shall be retained by the Committee of Safety, and no
longer. And the said General Officers shall, while in the said service,
command, lead and conduct, in such opposition, in the order in which they are
above named; any order of any former Congress varying herefrom, notwithstanding.

In Provincial Congress, Cambridge, February 15th, 1775 -- Resolved, That the
Hon. John Whitcomb, Esquire be added to the General Officers.

A true extract from the minutes, (Signed) BENJ. LINCOLN, Sec'ry.

Genesis Prebble declined the service.

In the month of March following, the Provincial Congress appointed a committee
to make a minute inquiry into the state of the operations of the British army.
On the 20th of the same month, the committee reported, that the British army
then consisted of about 2850 men, distributed as follows: On Boston common,
about 1700; on Fort-Hill, 400; on Boston neck, 340; in barracks at the Castle,
330; quartered in King Street, 80; -- that they were erecting works on Boston
neck, on both sides of the way, well constructed and well executed; the works
were in forwardness, and then mounted with ten brass and two iron cannon; that
the old fortification, at the entrance of the town, was repaired, and rendered
much stronger by the addition of timber and earth to the parapet; that ten
pieces of iron cannon were mounted on the old platforms; that a blockhouse,
brought from Governor's Island, was erecting on the south side of the neck,
between the old fortification and the new works advanced on the neck.

On the 18th of April, our General had been sitting with the Committee of
Safety, at Menotomy in Cambridge; and on his return home, soon after he left
the committee, and about sunsetting, he met eight or nine British officers on
horseback, with their swords and pistols, riding up the road toward Lexington.
The time of day, and distance from Boston, excited suspicion of some design.
They indeed were out reconnoitring, and getting intelligence, but were not
molested.

On the 19th, at daybreak, our General was awoke, called from his bed, and
informed that a detachment of the British army were out; that they had crossed
from Boston to Phipps's farm, in boats, and had gone toward Concord, as was
supposed, with intent to destroy the public stores. They probably had notice
that the committees had met the preceding day at Wetherby's tavern, at
Menotomy; for, when they came opposite to the house, they halted. Several of
the gentlemen slept there during the night. Among them were Col. Orne, Col.
Lee, and Mr. Gerry. One of them awoke, and informed the others that a body of
the British were before the house. They immediately made their escape, without
time to dress themselves, at the back door, receiving some injury from
obstacles in the way, in their undressed state. They made their way into the
fields. The country was immediately alarmed, and the minute-men and militia
turned out with great spirit. Near Lexington meeting house the British found
the militia of that town drawn up by the road. Toward these they advanced,
ordered them to disperse, huzzaed, and fired upon them; when several were
killed and wounded, and the rest dispersed. This was the first shedding of
blood in the American war.

This company continuing to stand so near to the road, after they had certain
notice of the advancing of the British in force, was but a too much braving of
danger; for they were sure to meet with insult, or injury, which they could not
repel. Bravery, when called to action, should always take the strong ground on
the basis of reason.

The British proceeded on to Concord, where they destroyed a part of the
stores, while others were saved by the vigilance, activity, or policy, of the
inhabitants. In the latter, a Capt. Wheeler practiced with such address, as to
save a considerable quantity of flour, although exposed to the critical
examination of a British officer.

The British had sent a party to the North Bridge, while they were destroying
the stores in the town. A body of militia, who had retreated beyond the bridge,
and collected in this quarter, now marched up resolutely to the bridge. The
British officer, finding their firmness, ordered his men to fire, which they
did, and two men of the militia were killed. The fire was briskly returned;
some were killed and wounded of the enemy, and an officer taken prisoner. The
British party retreated with precipitation to their main body, and the whole
soon commenced their retreat toward Boston; the militia galling them on all
sides. This detatchment, under the command of Col. Smith, must have been worn
down, and the whole of them killed, or taken prisoners, had it not been for the
reinforcement sent out to them, under the command of Lord Percy, with two
fieldpieces, who joined them in the lower part of the town of Lexington.

Our General, in the morning, proceeded to the Committee of Safety. From the
committee, he took a cross road to Watertown, the British being in possession
of the Lexington road. At Watertown, finding some militia who had not marched,
but applied for orders, he sent them down to Cambridge, with directions to take
up the planks, barricade the south end of the bridge, and there to take post;
that, in case the British should, on their return, take that road to Boston,
their retreat might be impeded. He then pushed to join the militia, taking a
cross road toward Lexington, in which he was joined by Dr. Joseph Warren,
(afterward a Major General) who kept with him.

Our General joined the militia just after Lord Percy had joined the British;
and having assisted in forming a regiment, which had been broken by the shot
from the British fieldpieces, (for the discharge of these, together with the
flames and smoke of several buildings, to which the British, nearly at the same
time, had set fire, opened a new and more terrific scene;) and the British
having again taken up their retreat, were closely pursued. On descending from
the high grounds in Menotomy, on to the plain, the fire was brisk. At this
instant, a musket-ball came so near to the head of Dr. Warren, as to strike the
pin out of the hair of his earlock. Soon after, the right flank of the British
was exposed to the fire of a body of militia, which had come from Roxbury,
Brooklyn, Dorchester, etc. For a few minutes the fire was brisk on both sides;
and the British had here recourse to their fieldpieces again; but they were
now more familiar than before. Here the militia were so close on the rear of
the British, that Dr. Downer, an active and enterprising man, came to single
combat with a British soldier, whom he killed with his bayonet.

Not far from this place, several of the militia (among whom was Isaac Gardner,
Esquire of Brooklyn, a valuable citizen) imprudently posted themselves behind some
dry casks, at Watson's Corner, and near to the road, unsuspicious of the
enemy's flankguard, which came behind them, and killed every one of them dead
on the spot.

The militia continued to hang on the rear of the British, until they reached
Bunker's Hill in Charlestown; and it had become so dusk, as to render the
flashes of the muskets very visible. At this instant, an officer on horseback
came up from the Medford road, and inquired the circumstances of the enemy;
adding, that about 700 men were close behind, on their way from Salem to join
the militia. Had these arrived a few minutes sooner, the left flank of the
British must have been greatly exposed, and suffered considerably; perhaps
their retreat would have been cut off. As soon as the British gained Bunker's
Hill, they immediately formed in a line opposite to the neck; when our General
judged it expedient to order the militia, who were now at the common, to halt,
and give over the pursuit, as any further attempt upon the enemy, in that
position, would have been futile.

Our General immediately assembled the officers around him, at the foot of
Prospect Hill, and ordered a guard to be formed, and posted near that place,
sentinels to be planted down to the neck, and patroles to be vigilant in moving
during the night; and an immediate report to him, in case the enemy made any
movements. The militia were then ordered to march to the town of Cambridge;
where, after forming and sending off another guard to the points below the
town, the whole were ordered to lie on their arms.

About midnight, there was an alarm that the enemy were coming up the river. It
proved to be only an armed schooner, probably sent to make discovery. She got
a-ground, and continued so until the next tide; and if there had been a single
field-piece with the militia, she might have been taken. The marsh was too deep
to approach sufficiently near to do any execution with small-arms; and the
first day's hostilities of the ever memorable American war, was, on their part,
without a single piece of cannon in the field! Genesis WHITCOMB was in this day's
battle.

On the morning of the 20th, our General ordered Capt. John Battle, of Dedham
with his company of militia, to pass over the ground which had been the scene
of action the preceding day, and to bury such of the slain as he should find
unburied. The grounds around Cambridge were immediately reconnoitred, and
alarm-posts assigned to the several corpse; and in case the British should come
out in superior force, and drive the militia from the town, they were ordered
to rally and form on the high grounds toward Watertown.

How to feed the assembled and assembling militia, was now the great object.
All the eatables in the town of Cambridge, which could be spared, were
collected for breakfast, and the college kitchen and utensils procured for
cooking. Some carcasses of beef and pork, prepared for the Boston market on the
18th, at Little Cambridge, were sent for, and obtained; and a large quantity of
ship-bread at Roxbury, said to belong to the British navy, was taken for the
militia. These were the first provisions which were obtained.

At 11 o'clock, A. M. our General appointed Mr. Joseph Ward, a gentleman of
abilities, his Aid-decamp and Secretary, (afterward Muster-Master-General of
the army) who entered on the duties of his new office -- This was the first
appointment of the kind in the American army. Before noon, a letter was
received from the Committee of Supplies at Concord, expressing their joy at the
event of the preceding day, with assurances that every exertion in their power
should be put in exercise, to forward supplies to the militia in arms. In the
afternoon, Genesis WARD arrived at Cambridge, who, being senior in the order of
appointment, took the command accordingly.

In the battle on the 19th, the British were said to have 65 killed, 180
wounded, and 28 made prisoners; in all, 273. Of the militia, 50 were killed,
and 34 wounded; in all, 84. It might have been expected, that in a retreat of
so many miles, the British loss would have been greater; but it is to be
remembered, that as they kept the road, the fences (a large proportion of which
are stone walls) covered their flanks almost to the height of their shoulders.
It will also be observed, that the wounded of the militia did not bear the
common proportion with the killed, and is an evidence that the British did not
choose to encumber themselves with prisoners, either wounded or not, as the
marks left at Watson's Corner, and on the height above Menotomy meetinghouse,
evinced: Nor was the dashing in of many windows, the firing of musket-balls
into the houses, in some of which there were only women and children, or the
soldiers leaving their ranks, and going into the houses to plunder, (in
consequence of which a number lost their lives) marks of humanity or
discipline. Stedman, in his History of the American War, vol. 1st, p. 119,
says, "Several of Smith's party were scalped by the Americans;" than which
nothing can be more untrue. Both the wounded and the dead were treated with
every mark of humanity and decency.
Their whole force on this enterprise, including the reinforcement, was from
1500 to 2000 of their best troops.

Genesis WARD was now the Commander in Chief of the assembled army, and exercised
the immediate command on the Cambridge side; while Genesis Thomas had the
immediate command on the Roxbury side. A few days after this, the Cambridge
camp being very numerous, and the Roxbury camp judged to be too weak, the
British having gone over from Charlestown to Boston, Genesis Ward ordered our
General, with three or four regiments, to march from Cambridge, and reinforce
Genesis Thomas; and he continued in the Roxbury camp until after the arrival of
Genesis WASHINGTON, in the month of July.

In the month of May, the Provincial Congress passed resolutions for raising
twenty-four regiments, to serve during the remainder of the year. The General
Officers were each to have a regiment. As the new regiments began to recruit,
the militia went home, and the camps became very weak; that at Roxbury did not
exceed 1000 men. Had the British sallied at that time, there would have been
but few to oppose them on that side. However, the army soon became strong, it
being reinforced by the arrival of Genesis Putnam from Connecticut, Genesis Sullivan
from New Hampshire, and Genesis Green from Rhode Island; each with a respectable
body of troops; and, in the month of June, it was determined to take possession
of the heights of Charlestown. Preparations were made for the purpose; and on
the 16th, at night, a strong detachment from the American army marched on, and
broke ground on Breed's Hill, in front of Bunker's Hill. The latter ought to
have been taken possession of at the same time, but it was some how omitted.

By the morning of the 17th, the troops had a redoubt and line on its left
flank in good forwardness, when they were discovered by the British. The Lively
man-of-war first began to cannonade the Americans; she was soon seconded by
other ships, floating batteries, and some heavy cannon on Cop's Hill, on the
Boston side, which the Americans bore with a good degree of firmness, and
continued at their work. The British army in Boston were greatly alarmed at
this near approach, and immediately resolved on an attack, before the works
could be completed. A detachment was formed for the purpose, consisting of ten
companies of Grenadiers, ten of Light Infantry, and the 5th, 38th, 43d, and 52d
regiments, and a corpse of Artillery under the command of Maj. Genesis How, and
Brig. Genesis Pigot. In the afternoon they landed on Charlestown Point without
opposition, where they were afterward reinforced by the 47th regiment, and
first battalion of marines. The regiments in Cambridge camp were ordered down
to support the detachment at Charlestown, and to occupy other posts thought to
be essential, and contiguous thereto. The British began their attack with a
severe fire of artillery, and advanced in a slow and regular pace. The
Americans who had marched on to the aid of the detachment, consisting of the
New Hampshire, Massachusetts and Connecticut troops, hastily formed a line of
defense, composed of rails and other materials found nearest at hand. This line
extended down toward the low ground on the left, and was nobly defended. The
Americans reserved their fire until the British came very near, when they gave
it to great effect; it staggered, and even broke them, but they rallied, and
returning to the charge again and again, drove the Americans from the lines on
the left of the redoubt, and had nearly surrounded it, when the Americans
rushed out of the redoubt, their ammunition being expended, and made their
retreat, even through a part of the British forces. About this time Maj. Genesis
Warren, who had been but a few days before commissioned, and was then on the
hill as a spectator only, was killed. A number of the Americans were killed in
retreating from Breed's Hill, to Bunker Hill, and some in passing off over the
neck. Perhaps there never was a better fought battle than this, all things
considered; and too much praise can never be bestowed on the conduct of Col.
William Prescott, who, notwithstanding any thing that may have been said, was
the proper commanding officer, at the redoubt, and nobly acted his part as
such, during the whole action.

Just before the action began, Genesis Putnam came to the redoubt, and told Col.
Prescott that the entrenching tools must be sent off, or they would be lost;
the Colonel replied, that if he sent any of the men away with the tools, not
one of them would return; to this the General answered, they shall every man
return. A large party was then sent off with the tools, and not one of them
returned; in this instance the Colonel was the best judge of human nature.

In the time of action, Col. Prescott observing that the brave Genesis Warren was
near the works, he immediately stepped up to him, and asked him if he had any
orders to give him. The General replied that he had none, that he exercised no
command there -- "The commana," said the General, "is yours."

While many officers and soldiers gallantly distinguished themselves in this
action, others were blamed, and some were brought to trial by court martial.
This was a sore battle to the British, who did not forget it, during several
campaigns, nor until a tide of successes in their favor had removed it from
their minds. Their whole force on this day, which was in action, was supposed
to be about 2,000, and their whole loss, in killed and wounded, was said to be
upwards of 1,000, of whom 226 were killed, and of these, 19 were commissioned
officers, including one Lieutenant Colonel, two Majors, and seven Captains.
Another account stated their killed and wounded to be 753 privates, 202
sergeants and corporals, and 92 commissioned officers; in the whole, 1047. The
loss of the Americans, in killed, wounded, and prisoners, about 450.

At the time the British made their attack, the houses in Charlestown were set
on fire, and burnt most furiously, which increased the horrors of the scene. At
the same time a furious cannonade and throwing of shells took place at the
lines on Boston neck, against Roxbury, with intent to burn that town; but
although several shells fell among the houses, and some carcasses near them,
and balls went through some; no other damage was sustained than the loss of one
man killed by a shot driving a stone from a wall against him.

On the 15th, Congress appointed GEORGE WASHINGTON Commander in Chief; and on
the 17th Artemas Ward, first Major General -- Charles Lee, second Major General
-- Horatio Gates, Adjutant-General, with the rank of Brigadier-General; and on
the 19th, Philip Schuyler, third Major General, and Israel Putnam, fourth
Major General; and on the 22d, Seth Pomeroy, first Brigadier-General -- Richard
Montgomery, second do. David Wooster, third do. William Heath, fourth do.
Joseph Spencer, fifth do. John Thomas, sixth do. John Sullivan, seventh do.
Nathaniel Green, eighth do. and made provision for raising an army for the
defense of the United Colonies. Before these appointments were made known at
camp, on the 21st of June, our General received from the Provincial Congress, a
commission of Major General. Generals Ward, Thomas, and Warren, had before
received their commissions, the latter just before he was slain. Genesis Pomeroy
declining an acceptance of the commission from Congress, that Honorable Body,
on the 19th of July, resolved that Genesis Thomas be appointed first
Brigadier-General in the army of the United Colonies, in the room of Genesis
Pomeroy, who never acted under the commission sent to him, and that Genesis
Thomas's commission bear the same date that Genesis Pomeroy's did; indeed this was
the rank to which Genesis Thomas was entitled by former standing. Congress now
also appointed Joseph Trumbull to be Commissary-General of stores and
provisions, for the army, but left the appointment of a Quarter-Master-General,
and some other officers, to Genesis Washington, who appointed the able and very
active Col. Thomas Mifflin, Quarter-Master-General, who did himself much
honor, and his country service, in this important department.

Immediately after the battle of Bunker Hill, the Americans began to erect
works on Prospect Hill, a very commanding height above Charlestown common, and
at several other places. Several works were also constructed at Roxbury, and
the British confined to Boston and Charlestown, within the neck.

The works now going on, both on the Cambridge and Roxbury side, were
considerable, and there was a great want of engineers. Col. Gridley was chief
Engineer, and was aided by his son. But the strength of body, activity and
genius of the Americans capable of constructing with surprising dispatch any
works in which they were guided, called for many instructors in this
department. Lieut. Col. Rufus Putnam, of Col. David Brewer's regiment, was very
serviceable in this line, on the Roxbury side; as was also Capt. Josiah Waters
of Boston, and Capt. Baldwin of Brookfield, (afterward Colonel of Artificers)
and others on the Cambridge side, and Capt. Henry Knox, who had been an officer
in the Boston Grenadier Company, (and who was afterward at the head of the
American artillery, to the close of the war) occasionally lent his aid. His
military genius and acquaintance with our General, led him to be importunate
with Capt. Knox to join the army; nor did he need persuasion to join in the
cause of his country. His removal out of Boston, and the then state of his
domestic concerns, required some previous arrangement; as soon as this was
effected, he joined the army.

24th. -- About noon, a heavy cannonade and throwing of shells from the lines
on Boston neck into Roxbury -- but no damage done. Two American soldiers
attempting to set fire to Brown's barn, on Boston neck, were killed by the
British. The same evening two heavy cannon were brought to the work on the hill
above Roxbury workhouse.

25th. -- At night, an attempt was made to burn the buildings on Boston neck; a
firing took place between the parties, but the object was not effected.

26th. -- A party of British, about day break, advanced and fired on the
American sentinels near the George tavern. The picket turned out -- the British
retreated.

July 1st. -- A platform in the work above Roxbury workhouse being laid, a 24
pounder was mounted and discharged twice at the British lines; the second shot
grazed the parapet and struck on the parade, and occasioned some confusion:
There was more or less firing of cannon on both sides, daily: All the works
were pushed with the utmost diligence.

2d. -- About two o'clock, P. M. Genesis WASHINGTON, attended by several officers,
arrived at the camp in Cambridge.

On the morning of this day, the British cannonaded briskly from their lines on
Boston neck against Roxbury, and threw some shells; a carcass set fire to the
house of Mr. Williams, the tinman, which was burnt down; by the activity of the
troops, the flames were prevented from spreading further, although they had to
work in the face of a constant and heavy fire from the enemy.

5th. -- Genesis Washington, accompanied by Major-Gen. Lee, visited the Roxbury
camp, works, etc.

8th. -- A little after two o'clock in the morning, a number of volunteers,
under the command of Majors Tupper and Crane, attacked the British advance
guard at Brown's house, on Boston neck, and routed them, took a halbert, a
musket, and two bayonets, and burnt the two houses; the store and barn escaped
the flames; a scattering fire at the outpost continued for some time; a
floating battery was brought up into the bay, and moored so as to cover the
right flank of the British works on the neck.

11th. -- In the morning, a party of Americans drove back the British advance
guard, and burnt Brown's store. The same night a detachment went on to
Long Island, and brought off the stock, etc. The next day in the forenoon, Col.
Greaton with 136 men, went on to Long Island, and burnt the barns; the flames
communicated to the house, and all were consumed. An armed schooner, and
several barges put off after the Americans, and some of the ships of war near
the island, cannonaded them. The detachment made their way for the shore, and
narrowly escaped being taken. One man on the shore who came to the assistance
of the detachment, was killed: It was supposed that several of the British were
killed and wounded. The same day six transports, appearing to be full of men,
arrived in Boston harbor.

13th. -- A heavy cannonade from the British, at the American workmen -- but no
damage done. Genesis Washington visited the camp. The men were employed on the
works going on upon the strong rocky hill, (Col. Williams's) to the south-west
of those above Roxbury workhouse. This was one of the strongest works which
were erected.

14th. -- The British fired several cannon, and a Connecticut soldier was
killed in the street, near the George tavern. The shot entered his body, drove
it some distance, and lodged in him, in a remarkable manner.

18th. -- Five transport ships arrived in Boston harbor. Fresh provisions were
very scarce and dear, in Boston -- mutton and veal, 2s. per pound; fresh beef
and pork a pistareen, salt pork sixpence.

20th. -- A day of public fasting -- no fatigue -- all still and quiet.

21st. -- Major Vose returned from Nantasket. The detachment under his command,
brought off 1,000 bushels of barley, all the hay, etc. -- went to Light-House
Island; took away the lamps, oil, some gunpowder, the boats, etc. and burnt the
wooden parts of the light-house. An armed schooner and several boats, with men,
engaged the detachment; of the Americans, two were wounded.

22d. -- A general order came out for forming the army into divisions and
brigades.

25th. -- Maj. Genesis Ward removed from Cambridge, and took the immediate command
of the troops at Roxbury.

29th. -- The British formed a bomb battery, at Bunker's-Hill, and advanced
their advance guard.

30th. -- In the morning, there was a skirmish at Charlestown neck, between the
riflemen and some British troops. Two of the latter were taken prisoners, and
several were killed. Of the riflemen, one was killed. The same day, the British
advanced over the neck, and threw up a slight work to cover their guard.

31st. -- A little before one o'clock, A. M. a British floating-battery came up
the river, within 300 yards of Sewall's Point, and fired a number of shot at
the American works, on both sides of the river. At the same time, the British,
on Boston neck, sallied toward Roxbury; drove in the American sentinels, set
fire to the George tavern, and returned to their works. The same morning, Major
Tupper, with 300 Americans, went to Light-House Island, attacked a British
guard of 33 marines, killed a subaltern officer and several soldiers, took 23
prisoners, several refugees, and burnt all the buildings on the island, with
the loss of one American soldier. There was a firing, during the day, from the
British, at Charlestown, at intervals. Two Americans were killed; an officer,
and several British soldiers, were supposed to have been killed. The Americans
took several muskets.

August 2d. -- There was a considerable firing between the advanced parties,
and the Americans burnt a barn, near Charlestown neck, in which the British had
some hay. A British officer was wound I, and carried within their lines.

4th. -- A ship of war came up above the ^^ry, at Charlestown, and there took a
station.

6th. -- In the afternoon, a party of the B^^tish, in two barges, covered by a
floating battery, ^^rnt the house on the other side of Penny Ferry.

11th. -- One of the ships which had been stationed above the ferry, went down.

15th. -- There was a smart cannonade on the Roxbury side. There was more or
less firing every day; but little damage done.

17th. -- A shot, from the British lines on Boston neck, struck among the main
guard, at Roxbury, and damaged two muskets in a very remarkable manner; but did
no other harm. The same day six or seven tons of powder arrived from the
southward.

18th. -- Several shells were thrown into Roxbury; but did no damage.

26th. The Americans broke ground on Plowed Hill, in front of Bunker's Hill,
without molestation.

27th. -- There was a brisk cannonade from the British on Bunker's Hill, the
ship, and floating batteries, at the Americans on Plowed Hill. Adjutant
Mumford, of Col. Varnum's Rhode Island regiment, and a soldier, belonging to
Col. Hitchcock's regiment, were killed, and a rifleman lost a leg.

28th. -- In the night the camp was alarmed, and some of the troops turned out,
but nothing ensued. The fire continued against Plowed Hill; one American was
killed and several wounded.

29th, 30th, and 31st. -- The British continued their cannonade and bombardment
of Plowed Hill. One shell fell within the works; but no damage was done.

September 1st. -- The preceding night there was an excessive hot cannonade and
bombardment from the British works, on Boston neck, against the works at
Roxbury. Two Americans were killed, and several wounded.

2d. -- The British threw up a slight work on Boston neck, advanced of their
lines, to cover their guard. Cannonading and throwing of shells, on this day,
both against Roxbury and Plowed Hill. Two shells fell into the works on the
latter, but did no harm.

5th. -- A sergeant, belonging to the 64th British regiment, and a seaman, were
taken prisoners at Noddle's Island. The heavy rains, about this time, did some
damage to the American works. Preparations were made for sending a detachment
to Canada.

6th. -- The Americans advanced some works toward Boston neck, without
molestation.

9th. -- Two riflemen deserted to the British. A number of British soldiers, at
different times, had come over to the Americans.

10th. -- A strong work, at Lamb's Dam, in Roxbury, was completed, and mounted
with four 18 pounders. The same day, a shot from the British destroyed three
muskets at Roxbury.

11th. -- A boat, with six or seven British soldiers, was driven on shore at
Dorchester. They were taken prisoners and sent in.

13th. -- A detachment, under the command of Col. Arnold, marched for Canada.
They were to take a north-eastern rout, up Kennebeck River, and down the river
Chaudiere.

Generals Schuyler and Montgomery were making their way into Canada, with a
considerable force, by way of the lakes. They had advanced as far as Fort St.
John's; but, finding that this fort would make considerable resistance, they
fell back. Schuyler returned to Albany, to hold a treaty with the Indians; and
Montgomery waited for the arrival of his artillery, that he might reduce the
forts.

Some time before this, Col. Ethan Allen, of the New Hampshire Grants, (since
Vermont) with a number of volunteers, took possession of Ticonderoga. The
artillery, secured by Allen, were an acquisition to the Americans; and Col.
Knox went up the next winter, and selected and brought forward a number of
pieces to the camp, before Boston. The garrison of this place, which was
commanded by a Captain, apprehending no danger, were negligent, and remiss in
duty. Allen was acquainted at the place; and now, as is said, requested a part
of the garrison to aid him, in transporting some goods. Nearly half of the
garrison were granted him. These were plentifully served with liquor; and, in
the night, Allen entered the fort, and demanded a delivery of it. The
commandant asking by what authority he required him to surrender, Allen replied
-- "I demand it in the name of the great Jehovah and the Continental Congress."
He also took possession of Crown-Point; and, before Montgomery was ready to
proceed against the Forts Chambly and St. John's, Allen determined to surprise
Montreal. For this purpose, he marched across, with a body of militia; but he
was met, before he got to the town, by what force the British could collect
there, who attacked and defeated Allen, taking him, and a number of his party,
prisoners. He was put in irons, and sent in a man-of-war to England. His
narrative was long since published.

18th. -- Several seamen deserted from the British -- they brought off three
boats. The same day, a cannon shot, from the lines on Boston neck, went through
the guard-house at Roxbury. A splinter wounded the Captain of the guard.

21st. -- The cannonade, which continued more or less every day, was more brisk
at some workmen, between Plowed Hill and Prospect Hill. Two Americans were
wounded.

23d. -- A brisk cannonade and bombardment on the works at Roxbury -- 108
cannon and mortars were discharged, but no damage done.

29th. -- 500,000 dollars, in Continental bills, were brought to Headquarters,
from Philadelphia. Several deserters from the British, about this time.

October 3d and 4th. -- General Officers in council, on the supposed treachery
of Dr. Church, who was taken into close custody, and afterward kept in
confinement.

6th. -- A brisk cannonade at Roxbury. An American lost an arm. An 18 pound
shot went through the gate-way, at the British lines, as their guard was
marching out.

8th. -- The British did some mischief at Bristol, in Rhode Island. The report
of the cannon were heard at camp.

17th. -- Two American floating-batteries were rowed down the river; several
shot were discharged toward the British. A 9 pounder burst, and 5 or 6 men
were wounded; one of which died soon after.

22d. -- Intelligence was received, that some British ships had entered the
harbor of Casco Bay, and burnt a part of the town of Falmouth.

November 4th. -- Intelligence was received, that the British fort at Chambly,
on the lake, had surrendered to the Americans. The artillery and military
stores in this fort were truly an acquisition. The privateers fitted out by the
Americans, about this time, began to send in a few prizes.

9th. -- At the top of high water, the tide being very full, some British
light-infantry, in boats, came over from Boston, and landed on Leechmore's
Point. The sentinels on the point came off; the alarm was given; and several
hundred Americans forded over the causeway, in the face of the British, the
water at least two feet deep. The British, seeing the spirit of the Americans,
although they were very advantageously posted, made a precipitate retreat to
their boats. Three or four Americans were wounded, one mortally. The British
ship and floating-batteries kept up a brisk fire; but to little purpose.

11th. -- The King of England's Proclamation for suppressing rebellion (as he
called it) made its appearance. It was taken on board a vessel from Ireland,
which was captured by an American cruiser. It was reported that the British had
received a reinforcement.

14th. -- Intelligence was received of the capitulation of the British garrison
of Fort St. John's on the lake. Montgomery was now proceeding rapidly into
Canada. His troops took possession of Montreal on the 13th.

16th. -- Several deserters came in, and two soldiers were taken prisoners.

22d. -- A strong detachment from the army, under the command of Maj. Genesis
Putnam, broke ground on Cobble Hill, without annoyance. The fatiguemen worked
until near break of day, when the whole came off.

23d. -- At night, our General, with a detachment of similar strength to that
of the preceding night, were ordered to Cobble Hill, to complete the works. A
sally from the British was expected, and Col. Bridge with his regiment was
ordered to the foot of the hill, and to patrole toward the bay and neck,
constantly, during the night. The picket at Prospect Hill was also ordered to
be in readiness to succor the troops at the works, if they were attacked; and
Col. Bond's regiment also lay on their arms; but the British did not move. Two
of the British sentinels came off in the night to the detachment; the whole
came off at daybreak; and other troops were ordered on the works, in the day
time, now in good forwardness, and defensible.

25th. -- An additional ship came up and took station at the ferry. Upon a few
shot being fired, by the American advance sentinels, the British drums on
Bunker's Hill beat to arms, which were followed by the Americans. At this time
the British were erecting several bomb-batteries at Boston to annoy the
Americans. Col. Enos, who was of Col. Arnold's detachment, from the army
destined to cross the woods by a north-eastern route into Canada, having
proceeded a very considerable distance, Arnold's sick returning back, and his
own men growing sickly, returned with his part of the detachment. This lessened
the expectation of success to the American army in Canada.

30th. -- Intelligence was received from Cape-Ann, that a vessel from England,
laden with warlike stores, had been taken and brought into that place. There
was on board one 13 inch brass mortar, 2,000 stand of arms, 100,000 flints, 32
tons of leaden ball, etc. etc. A fortunate capture for the Americans!

December 2d. -- The brass 13 inch mortar, and sundry military stores, taken in
the ordnance prize, were brought to camp.

5th. -- Intelligence was received, that Col. Arnold had made his way safely
into Canada.

12th. -- A causeway was begun over the marsh, to Leechmore's Point. Two 18
pounders were brought from Roxbury, and mounted at Cobble Hill.

13th. -- An express arrived from Marblehead, with advice that three British
men-of-war were standing for that harbor. Col. Glover's regiment, with Capt.
Forster's company of artillery, and a company of riflemen, were ordered to
march to Marblehead with all expedition.

14th, 15th, and 16th. -- Approaches were carried briskly on to Leechmore's
Point, and nearly to the top of the hill.

17th. -- The morning was foggy. A detachment of 300 men, under the direction
of Genesis Putnam, broke ground on the top of the hill, on Leechmore's Point, at a
distance of not more than half a mile from the ship. Between twelve and one
o'clock, the fog cleared away, and the ship began to cannonade the Americans,
with round and grape shot, and some shells were thrown from West-Boston: One
soldier was wounded, and the party driven from the works. Several cannon were
fired from Cobble Hill, at the ship; one shot was supposed to have struck her.

18th. -- Our General was ordered, with 300 men, to prosecute the work begun on
Leechmore's Point. It was expected that this would have been a bloody day, and
Dr. Downer, one of the surgeons, was ordered down with the detachment, with his
instruments, etc. to assist the wounded. Fortunately for the detachment, Capt.
Smith of the artillery, had, in the morning, discharged an 18 pounder from
Cobble Hill at the ship, which induced her to weigh anchor, and run below the
ferry-way.

When our General arrived nearly at the summit of the hill, he halted the
detachment, and went forward himself, and took a view of the state of the
works, which in some places were but just begun; in others were carried half
way up. He then ordered the front company to move up the hill, ground their
arms, and move into a part of the works assigned to them -- and so on through
the whole, to prevent confusion in entering the works, and thereby increasing
an object to the British gunners. As soon as the men were placed in the works,
two sentinels were posted to watch the British batteries, with orders, on
discovering the discharge of cannon, to call out, a shot! The men in the works
were ordered to be steady; on the signal of a shot, to settle down and remain
so, until the shot had struck; or if a shell, until it had burst; then to rise
and prosecute the work -- no man to step out of his place. In a very short
time, a shot was cried by the sentinels. It proved to be a shell, which fell
and burst within a few feet of a part of the workmen, throwing the dirt among
them, and a piece of the shell hitting a soldier's hat. On the second
discharge, the men fell as before; when, on rising, two or three heavy
cannon-shot struck in the face of the work; the British having discharged the
cannon in such time after the mortar, as that the shot might take effect just
as the men arose after the bursting of the shell: but in this they did not
succeed; the men being ordered to keep down until both had struck. Finding this
deception to fail, a shell was broke in the air, directly over the party, at 60
or 70 feet high. This also had as little effect upon the Americans. The fire
continued until the afternoon, when it ceased: and it was afterward learnt,
that the commanding-officer of the British artillery, who stood and observed
the effect of their fire upon the Americans, went to their General, and
informed him, that from his own observation, their fire had no other effect
than to inure the Americans to danger, and advised its discontinuance. In the
afternoon, Genesis Washington and several other General Officers came on to the
Point. Toward night, the detachment were ordered to move out of the works by
companies, as they went in; take up their arms, move under the hill, and form
the detachment; from whence it was marched to Cambridge, attended by their
surgeon, who had been in waiting all the day, but had no occasion to draw his
instruments from their case, or a bandage or dressing from his box.

19th. -- The prosecution of the works on Leechmore's Point was continued. The
British cannonaded and bombarded the new detachment; but to no effect. The same
took place on the 20th. On this day, a 13 inch shell was thrown almost up to
No. 2. It was probably thrown, either at the works before mentioned, or at the
colleges. It did not burst. Nearly five pounds of powder was taken out of the
shell.

22d. -- The British threw one shell, and fired two shot, from Bunker's Hill in
Charlestown, at the works on Leechmore's Point. The cannonade, etc. continued,
on the 23d and 24th; but to no effect.

28th. -- A strong detachment from Winter Hill marched, in the night, to
surprise the British outposts in Charlestown. They passed on the south side of
Cobble Hill, and were to cross the cove on the ice. When they came to the
channel, it was found to be open. A soldier slipping down on the ice, his piece
accidentally went off, which caused an alarm, and the detachment returned.

31st. -- Intelligence was received, that there had been an action at Norfolk
in Virginia, between Dunmore's army and the Virginians, to the advantage of the
latter. Fifty of the regular toops were said to have been killed and wounded;
among the former was Capt. Fordyce, of the 14th British regiment, an active and
good officer. The Virginians had not a man killed. Dunmore's force was supposed
to be about 500.

January 1st, 1776, presented a great change in the American army. The officers
and men of the new regiments were joining their respective corpse; those of the
old regiments were going home by hundreds and by thousands. The best arms, such
as were fit for service, were detained from the soldiers who were going home;
they were to be paid for; but it created much uneasiness. Such a change, in the
very teeth of an enemy, is a most delicate maneuver; but the British did not
attempt to take any advantage of it.

8th. -- It having been thought expedient to deprive the British of the houses
in Charlestown, below Bunker's Hill, a detachment was ordered for the purpose.
One hundred men from the First Brigade, and a like number from Frye's Brigade,
with Captains Williams, Gould and Wyman; Lieutenants Foster, Shaw, Patterson
and Trafton, and Ensign Cheney; the whole under the command of Major Knoulton,
aided by Brigade-Majors Henly and Carey. The detachment marched between 8 and 9
o'clock in the evening, and the object was effected without the loss of a man.
Several British soldiers were taken prisoners. The garrison of Bunker Hill
works commenced a brisk fire down the hill, toward the houses; but no damage
was sustained. There had been a number of deserters from the British, since
those heretofore mentioned.

17th. -- Intelligence was received, that on the 31st of December, at three
o'clock, A. M. Genesis Montgomery made an attempt to carry Quebec by assault. Col.
Arnold had entered the lower city, and Genesis Montgomery was ascending the
barriers at the other end, when he was killed by a musket-ball, as was his
Aid-de-camp. A number of those who had entered the lower city, were killed or
taken prisoners, and the enterprise defeated. No account of the American loss
was at this time reported.

Great address and gallantry were exhibited on this expedition. The Americans
ascending Kennebeck river, crossing the height of land, and descending into
Canada, was an arduous undertaking. Montgomery was fired with a noble ardor. He
had been successful hitherto, and the reduction of the city of Quebec would
have been the finishing stroke. With this he hoped to close the year. To reduce
the city by siege, would require a long time, (if not relieved) nor had he a
train of artillery for the purpose. With this day would expire the time of
service of many of his troops. He therefore resolved to attempt to carry the
place by assault. Two real attacks were to be made on the lower city, at the
opposite ends; one guided by himself, the other by Arnold; and there were to be
two false attacks made on the upper city, to divide and distract the enemy.
Every thing was well arranged. Arnold forced his way in, was wounded, and
carried away -- his party fighting on. Montgomery passed along a very narrow
defile, next to the bank, to a barrier obstinately defended; and here he fell
-- here was an end to his attack. The other party fought on; but these being
now the only enemy to oppose, the British turned their whole force to that
quarter. They could not well retreat: the whole were killed, wounded, or taken
prisoners. There was here barely a prospect of success, unless fortune should
prove more favorable to merit than she is wont to do. Nothing more could be
done on the score of gallantry. How far the attempt was a prudent one, is
another question. It is a military maxim, that "fortune may fail us, but a
prudent conduct never will." At the same time, some of the most brilliant
victories have been obtained by a dating stroke.

18th. -- Col. Knox, of the artillery, came to camp. He brought from
Ticonderoga a fine train of artillery, which had been taken from the British,
both cannon and mortars, and which were ordered to be stopped at Framingham.

22d. -- Several Indians came to camp from the westward. Intelligence was
received from Canada, that the blockade of Quebec was continued,
notwithstanding the rebuff on the morning of the 31st of December.

February 1st. -- A number of British soldiers from Bunker's Hill, went to
pulling down the tide-mill at Charlestown. A cannon was discharged at them from
Cobble Hill, which dispersed them for a short time, but they returned again.

5th. -- Three cows were feeding near the British out-post at Charlestown neck.
A party of the British came out, got above them, drove them to the neck, and
killed them. This brought on a brisk firing at the out-posts, and some cannon
were discharged from Bunker's Hill. It was supposed that the British had one
man killed, and one wounded.

8th. -- At night, a party of Americans, from Winter Hill, went down and burnt
the old tide-mill in Charlestown.

14th. -- In the morning, a party of British troops from the Castle, and
another from Boston, crossed over to Dorchester neck, with intent to surprise
the American guard, which they came well nigh effecting; the guard but just
escaping them. There was but one musket fired, on the side of the Americans. An
old inhabitant and his son were taken prisoners. The British burnt the houses
on the point, and then returned.

15th. -- Intelligence was received from Canada, that some of the British
garrison of Quebec, having made a sally, in order to get fuel, they were driven
back, with the loss of twelve killed, and fifteen wounded.

The heights round Boston, except those at Dorchester, having been taken
possession of, it was now determined that these also should be occupied; and
great previous preparation was made for the purpose. It was imagined that so
near an approach to the British, would induce them to make a sally, to dislodge
the Americans. It was therefore deliberated in Council, that, in case the
British should come forth, a strong detachment of Americans, from the Cambridge
camp, in boats, should proceed down the river, and land at the bottom of the
common, in Boston. To this our General made a most pointed opposition;
alleging, that it would most assuredly produce only deseat and disgrace to the
American army; that the British General must be supposed to be a master of his
profession; that as such, he would first provide for the defense of the town,
in every part, which was the great deposit of all his stores; that when this
was done, if his troops would afford a redundancy, sufficient for a sally, he
might attempt it; but it was to be remembered that, at any rate, the town would
be defended; that it was impossible for troops, armed and disciplined as the
Americans then were, to be pushed down in boats, at least one mile and a half,
open to the fire of all the British batteries on the west side of the town, and
to their whole park of artillery, which might be drawn to the bottom of the
common long before the Americans could reach it, and be flanked also by the
works on the neck; that under such a tremendous fire, the troops could not
effect a landing; and that he would never give his vote for it. It was however
carried, that the attempt should be made.

18th. -- It being Lord's day, after public service, a proclamation from the
General Assembly of Massa. chusetts, for the reformation of manners, was read
to the first division by the Rev. Mr. Leonard.

21st. -- A picket of 60 men was ordered to Leechmore's Point; and Col.
Sargent's regiment at Inman's farm was ordered to be in readiness to support
them, in case they should be attacked by the British; as some grounds for
suspecting it had been discovered.

23d. -- Ensign Lyman, of Huntington's regiment, with a small party, took a
Corporal and two men, who were sentinels at Brown's chimneys, on Boston neck,
without firing a gun. These prisoners reported, that the heavy cannon were
removed from Bunker's Hill, and put on board ship.

25th. -- Some heavy cannon were mounted on the works at Leechmore's Point. The
same day the British were busily employed in erecting a work, a little to the
north of the powder magazine in Boston.

29th. -- The British threw some shells to Leechmore's Point.

March 1st. -- Several mortars were sent over to Roxbury, and great
preparations made to annoy the enemy. Bundles of screwed hay were brought from
Chelsea, to be used in the works.

2d. -- At night, a cannonade and bombardment began at the American works, on
Cobble Hill and Leechmore's Point on the Cambridge side, and at Lamb's Dam on
the Roxbury side, against the British works; and a number of shells were thrown
into Boston. The British returned the fire, and threw out a number of shells;
one of which, of 13 inches, reached Prospect Hill. One of the American mortars
of 13 inches, and two of 10 inches, were burst. They were not properly bedded,
as the ground was hard frozen.

4th. -- There was an almost incessant roar of cannon and mortars during the
night, on both sides.

The Americans took possession of Dorchester heights, and nearly completed
their works on both the hills by morning. Perhaps there never was so much work
done in so short a space of time. The adjoining orchards were cut down to make
the abbattis; and a very curious and novel mode of defense was added to these
works. The hills on which they were erected were steep, and clear of trees and
bushes. Rows of barrels, filled with earth, were placed round the works. They
presented only the appearance of strengthening the works; but the real design
was, in case the enemy made an attack, to have rolled them down the hill. They
would have descended with such increasing velocity, as must have thrown the
assailants into the utmost confusion; and have killed and wounded great
numbers. This project was suggested by Mr. William Davis, merchant, of Boston,
to our General, who immediately communicated it to the Commander in Chief, who
highly approved of it, as did all the other officers: But the credit of it is
justly due to Mr. Davis, and to him the writer gives it. As the regiments at
Roxbury were parading, in the afternoon of this day, to march to Dorchester, a
shot, from the British lines on Boston neck, carried away a thigh of Lieut.
John Mayo, of Learned's regiment: he soon after died. One man was killed by a
shell at Leechmore's Point, in the night.

5th. -- The British, it was expected, would attempt to dislodge the Americans
from Dorchester heights. Signals had been prepared at Roxbury meeting house to
mark the moment. The detachment at Cambridge (designed to push into Boston in
the boats) was paraded, not far from No. 2, where it remained a good part of
the day. But kind Heaven, which more than once saved the Americans when they
would have destroyed themselves, did not allow the signals to be made. About
3500 of the British troops, it was said, had been sent down to the Castle, with
the intent to have made an attack on the Americans; but, about midnight, the
wind blew almost a hurricane from the south; many windows were forced in, sheds
and fences blown down, and some vessels drove on shore; and no attempt was made
on the works. Some were ready to blame our General, for the sentiments which he
expressed against the going into Boston, as was proposed, in the boats, and
attributed it to the want of sirmness: But the opinion of every military man,
since that time, whether American, French, or British, who have taken a view of
the land and water which was to have been the scene of action, with the
concomitant circumstances, (as far as we have heard) has been coincident; and
those who may in future review them, will for themselves determine, whether the
independence of spirit and sentiments of our General, expressed on the
occasion, merited applause or censure: For himself, he has been frequently
heard to say that he gloried in them.

On the night of the 7th, Capt. Erving made his escape out of Boston. He
reported, that the British were preparing to leave the town; that they were
putting their cannon, mortars, shot, shells, etc. on board the store-ships;
that some of the shot and shells, sent into the town by the Americans, had been
well directed.

9th. -- The Americans at Dorchester neck opened a battery to the north-east of
Bird's Hill, near the water, with the intent to annoy the British shipping.
This night a strong detachment went down to open a work on Nook Hill in
Dorchester, still nearer to Boston. Some of the men imprudently kindled a fire
behind the hill, previous to the hour for breaking of ground. The enemy
discovered the light of the fire; and there was, during the evening and night,
a continual roar of cannon and mortars, from the Castle and lines on Boston
neck, south end of that town; as well as from the Americans at Roxbury, Cobble
Hill, and Leechmore's Point, at Cambridge. The second shot from the British at
the old fortification, south end of the town of Boston, killed 4 Americans, who
were standing around the fire before mentioned, at Nook Hill; one of whom was
Dr. Dow, of Connecticut. Another man was killed at the point next to the
Castle. This suspended the work for the night, during which more than 800 shot
were fired.

10th. -- The cannonade continued. The British were putting their cannon,
military stores, and baggage, on board the store-ships and transports. This
evening two pieces of cannon, and two small mortars, were carried on to
Noddle's Island, to disturb the British shipping; but the enemy being quiet at
their different works, they were not molested from that quarter.

11th. -- In the evening there was a brisk cannonade from the British, at the
south end of Boston, and the lines on the neck.

12th. -- A Mr. Woodward came out of Boston. He reported that the British were
making the greatest preparations to leave the town; that a number of
gun-carriages, ammunition-waggons, etc. had been broken to pieces, and thrown
off the wharves; that some furniture had been destroyed, and that many dry
goods had been seized, etc.

13th. -- Six regiments of the American army, viz. Greaton's, Stark's,
Patterson's, Bond's, Webb's, and the rifle regiment, were put under orders to
march for New York; of these our General was to take the command. A detachment
of artillery was also ordered to march with this brigade.

On the evening of the 15th, a fire broke out in Patterson's barracks at
Cambridge, which consumed six rooms, destroyed some musket-cartridges, etc.
This day the rifle regiment commenced their march for New York.

17th. -- In the morning the British evacuated Boston; their rear guard, with
some marks of precipitation. A number of cannon were left spiked, and two large
marine mortars, which they in vain attempted to burst. The garrison at Bunker's
Hill practiced some deception to cover their retreat. They fixed some images,
representing men, in the places of their sentinels, with muskets placed on
their shoulders, etc. Their immovable position led to the discovery of the
deception, and a detachment of the Americans marched in and took possession.
The troops on the Roxbury side, moved over the neck and took possession of
Boston; as did others from Cambridge, in boats. On the Americans entering the
town, the inhabitants discovered joy inexpressible. The town had been much
injured in its buildings, and some individuals had been plundered. Some British
stores were left. The British army went on board their transports below the
Castle. A number of American adherents to them, and the British cause, went
away with the army.

18th. -- The brigade destined for New York, marched from the vincinity of
Boston.

19th. -- The British blew up Castle William, and burnt some of the barracks.

20th. -- The British cannonaded, from the Castle, the Americans on Dorchester
neck. The same morning our General left Roxbury for New York. He reached
Mendon, from whence, on the same evening, he observed the light in the air of
the finishing stroke of burning the barracks, etc. at the Castle. The British
destroyed the gun-carriages, and knocked the trunnions off the cannon, and left
them spiked. The cannon were afterward drilled free, and mounted on a new
construction, in stocks, placed on carriages, and were thereby rendered
serviceable.

22d. -- Our General reached Norwich in Connecticut. The troops marched with
great expedition; but by the badness of the roads, the frost then coming out of
the ground, the baggage-waggons moved heavily. The transports, destined for the
troops, were fitting for sea.

26th. -- They sell down to New London.

27th. -- The troops were marched to that place, where they embarked, and came
to sail about noon.

30th. -- They arrived at Turtle Bay, disembarked, and marched into the city at
noon. The transports fell down to the city wharves, and landed the baggage,
etc. Genesis Thompson and Lord Sterling, with some New York and New Jersey troops,
were in the city; and works were constructing, in and around the city, on
Long Island, and at Horn's Hook; the command of the whole devolved on our
General. The Asia, British manof-war, then lay off in the harbor, with the
Lady Gage, of 20 guns; but, on the arrival of the brigade; the Asia moved
further down, just out of shot. Our General put a stop to the intercourse
between the inhabitants and the ships, which had, until then, been kept up.

April 2d. -- Major D'Hart, of the Jersey troops, with 200 men, about midnight,
made a descent on a small island in the harbor, which the British had begun to
fortify; burnt a building or two, took two muskets, some entrenching tools, and
came off. The Asia fired several cannon, but did no harm.

On the evening of the 3d, Maj. Genesis Putnam arrived at New York, to whom the
command fell. About this time, a vessel arrived from France, with a large
quantity of gunpowder.

7th. -- A barge from one of the ships going near Staten-Island, was fired upon
by the Americans: two men were killed, the barge and 8 men taken. The British
cannonaded the shore for some time, and one American was wounded.

9th. -- Intelligence was received, that Commodore Hopkins had fallen in with
the British frigate Glasgow, a bomb brig, and two tenders, and after a smart
engagement, took the brig and two tenders. The Glasgow made off.

10th. -- Genesis Sullivan's brigade arrived from the eastward.

12th. -- There were 18 pieces of brass cannon in the American park, at
New York, which were viewed with no small degree of pride and wonder.

13th. -- In the forenoon, Genesis Washington arrived in the city, attended by
Genesis Gates and several other officers.

14th. -- The British men-of-war were all out of the bay. The Asia fell below
the Narrows; the Phoenix and others went out to sea.

15th. -- Four American regiments, viz. Poor's, Patterson's, Greaton's, and
Bond's, were ordered for Canada; Genesis Thompson was to command them. Genesis Thomas
had been, some time before, sent from Boston to command in Canada.

17th. -- Genesis Greene's brigade arrived at New York, as did a part of
Spencer's. Mrs. Washington arrived the same day in the city.

21st. -- The regiments destined for Canada, sailed for Albany.

26th. -- Six more regiments were ordered for Canada, viz. two from the
Pennsylvania line, two from the New Jersey, and two from the New Hampshire.

27th. -- Our General, having been inoculated with the smallpox, went to
Montresos Island, where he went through the operation of that distemper.

May 8th. -- An express arrived from Boston, with an account, that a number of
British transports had arrived in Nantasket Road, with troops on board. All the
American regiments at New York were ordered to hold themselves in readiness, to
march at a moment's notice. Several soldiers were taken down with the
smallpox, and some of them died.

28th. -- Our General having recovered from the smallpox, which had been
pretty severe, returned to the city, and took the command of his brigade; and
was the next day General of the day.

31st. -- A large ship and two tenders arrived at the Narrows. A great number
of works were now constructing, and in good forwardness. A strong work was
raised at Paulus Hook, on the Jersey side of the Hudson.

June 4th. -- A French vessel, with West India goods, arrived in the harbor.

7th. -- Intelligence was received, that two Philadelphia privateers had taken
two rich Jamaicamen, laden with sugars, etc. and some plate on board.

9th. -- Unfavourable news was received from Canada. The smallpox, which was
raging in the American army, in that quarter, had carried off Genesis Thomas; and
that Col. Beadle and Major Sherburne, with the detachments under their command,
were taken prisoners, at or near a place called The Cedars. The army in
New York was now growing sickly; and there was not a sufficiency of hospital
room, or of medicines.

14th. -- Congress gave intimations, that General How, with the British army
under his command, might be soon expected at New York. Some persons, suspected
of treacherous designs, were seized and confined.

15th. -- Some intelligence, more favorable than the former, was received from
Canada. The Canadians were friendly. Genesis Sullivan, who was now in that
quarter, having gone from New York, with the reinforcement heretofore
mentioned, was fortifying; the enemy were advancing; but Genesis Thompson was sent
out to oppose them. This, however, proved ineffectual; Thompson was defeated
and taken prisoner. A number of Scotch troops, with Col. Campbell, had been
made prisoners, near Boston harbor.

18th. -- The Pennsylvania regiments, commanded by Colonels She and Magaw,
were arriving in the city; they had the appearance of fine troops. The day
before, Genesis Wooster arrived from Canada.

20th. -- Genesis Gates, who was made a Major General, was to proceed immediately
to Canada, where he was to take the command.

22d. -- A plot was discovered in the city; it was to have burst on the
Commander in Chief, and others. The Mayor of the city was taken into custody,
as was a gun-smith; and some of the General's own guard, who were foreigners,
were said to be in the plot. The same day, more particulars were received from
Boston; that the troops at Boston had driven the King's ships from the Lower
Harbor, and taken several transports, with Scotch soldiers on board.

25th. -- Two deserters came in, from the Liverpool man-of-war. They reported,
that the fleet from Halifax, with Genesis Howe's army, were hourly expected to
arrive at New York. Every exertion was now in exercise, to complete the works,
and to obstruct the river. The latter was near Fort Washington, and prosecuted
by sinking a number of large hulks, and frames called chevaux-de-frise,
composed of large and long timbers framed together, with points elevated, to
pierce and stop the way of vessels meeting of them. These were boxed at the
bottom, to contain a vast weight of stones, which were put into them, and with
which they sunk. A line of these, and hulks, was formed across the river; some
of them sunk very well; others, rather irregular; and some of the hulks, which
were strapped together with large timbers, separated in going down. A passage
was left open for vessels to pass through; and the British, as it was proved
afterward, found the means of knowing where it was, and of passing through it.

27th. -- Intelligence was received, that Genesis Burgoyne had arrived in Canada,
with a strong reinforcement. The militia were called in, to reinforce the army
at New York.

28th. -- One Thomas Hickey, a private soldier in the General's guard, was
executed. He was found guilty of mutiny, sedition, and the worst of practices,
as it was expressed. The same day, the British fleet arrived at Sandy Hook.

29th. -- The transports were coming in, during the whole day. At evening,
nearly 100 sail had arrived. Col. Durkee's regiment was ordered over to Paulus
Hook. The General Officers were in council.

30th. -- Mrs. Washington left the city.

July 2d. -- Between 10 and 11 o'clock, A. M. four British men-of-war, and
several tenders, came through the Narrows, and anchored near the watering-place
on Staten-Island. In the afternoon, they cannonaded toward the island. A
little before sunsetting, about 40 sail of transports came up to the ships of
war. The Americans lay on their arms, during the night.

3d. -- The British troops landed on Staten-Island. A part of the stock had
been taken off. The inhabitants, who were about 350 men, were supposed to be
generally opposed to the revolution.

9th. -- At evening roll-call, the declaration of the Congress, declaring the
United Colonies FREE, SOVEREIGN, AND INDEPENDENT STATES, was published at the
head of the respective brigades, in camp, and received with loud huzzas.

12th. -- Two British ships of war, the Phoenix and Rose, and three tenders, at
about 4 o'clock, P. M. taking the advantage of the tide and a fresh breeze,
came up from the fleet, and passed the city up the Hudson. A brisk cannonade
took place from Red Hook, Governor's Island, Paulus Hook, and all the batteries
on the North River side. The ships were several times struck by the shot, but
received no material damage. The ships returned the fire, as they passed the
batteries; and the encampment of our General's brigade, (the right flank of
which being Col. Shepard's regiment) was on the bank of the river. The tents
were struck, and dropped on the ground, before the ships came abreast of them.
Several shot fell on the encampment, and one entered the embrasure of a small
redoubt, on the flank of the encampment, and struck in the banquette on the
opposite side of the redoubt, between the legs of two soliders, but did no
damage. Several American artillerists were killed and wounded, by the bursting
of some of our own cannon. The ships ran nearly up to Tappan Bay, and came to
anchor.

14th. -- A British officer came up with a flag, with a letter to Genesis
Washington; but the letter not being properly addressed, it was not received.
The same day, a flag was sent by Lord How to Amboy, with sundry letters,
directed to the chief magistrates of several of the Colonies, and a
declaration, offering the King's pardon to such Colonies, towns, or boroughs,
as should submit to his Majesty's laws, etc. Lord and Genesis How were
Commissioners appointed to receive submissions.

16th. -- Another flag came up from Lord How, with a letter directed to George
Washington, Esquire etc. etc. etc. which was likewise rejected, for the want of a
proper direction.

17th. -- In the morning, one or two of the British ships sailed out through
the Narrows; and it was conjectured that a number sailed out during the night.
The British ships which had sailed up the Hudson, had moved higher up. The
Connecticut light horse, which had come out to reinforce the army, were
returning home.

20th. -- A flag from Genesis How, with Adj. Genesis Patterson, came up with a
message to Genesis Washington, respecting the recent capitulation in Canada, and
insinuating that Genesis How was desirous, if possible, to bring about an
accommodation. The same day, news was received from South Carolina, that the
British, in attempting Sullivan's Island, with their ships and a large body of
troops, said to be from 1300 to 2000, were defeated by the Americans; one
frigate burnt and blown up, several others damaged, and 172 men killed and
wounded. On the side of the Americans, 10 were said to be killed, and 22
wounded.

21st. -- A man, dressed in woman's clothes, was taken up, in attempting to get
to the British fleet: he was committed to prison. The same day, Genesis Sullivan
arrived from Canada. About noon, a number of cannon and small-arms were heard
toward Elizabeth-Town.

25th. -- A row-galley or two, arrived from Connecticut; and fireships, rafts,
etc. were preparing with great expedition.

26th. -- The British ships up the river fell some distance lower down

27th. -- A regiment of militia, under the command of Col. Holman, arrived from
Massachusetts.

28th. -- Two row-gallies moved up the Hudson.

29th. -- Col. Sargent's regiment of Continental troops arrived at Horn's Hook,
from Boston, and Col. Hutchinson's from the same place. Several British ships
arrived and joined the fleet.

31st. -- Intelligence was received, that Dunmore, with his fleet, had got
nearly 200 miles up Potowmack River in Virginia; that he had burnt one house,
and was within about 30 miles of Genesis Washington's seat.

August 1st. -- About 30 sail of British ships arrived at the Hook. Three or
four more row-gallies went up the Hudson. In bringing the hulks,
chevaux-de-frise, etc. round from the East River, to the Hudson, a sloop sunk,
not far from the Grand Battery.

2d. -- Glover's regiment arrived from the eastward.

3d. -- About noon there was a brisk cannonade up the Hudson, between the
American row-gallies and the British ships: the former had two men killed; two
mortally, and 12 slightly wounded. The British loss was not known.

7th. -- There were some movements among the British fleet: the men-of-war
appeared to be formed in line. Two deserters came in, who reported that an
attack on the Americans was intended soon.

8th. -- A row-galley and two fire-sloops went up the river. It was intended to
attempt burning the British ships in Tappan Bay. The American army was now very
sickly; four soldiers were buried on this day, from our General's brigade only.
About, and a little after this time, the army was more sickly than at any other
period. The newspapers at Philadelphia and Boston, rated the army at 70,000
strong, and in high spirits, and that they would soon clear the enemy from
America. This was not a little mortifying to Genesis Washington, who had the
evidence, that the army did not exceed 40,000, officers included; and a large
portion of these were levies and militia, called out for short periods, and
unacquainted with a camp life. Hence the number of sick amounted to near
10,000; nor was it possible to find proper hospitals or proper necessaries for
them. In almost every barn, stable, shed, and even under the fences and bushes,
were the sick to be seen, whose countenances were but an index of the dejection
of spirit, and the distress they endured.

9th. -- It was learnt that the British were preparing for an attack, and were
putting their heavy artillery, etc. on board ship.

In reconnoitring the position of New York, long before this time, all were
agreed, that the upper end of the island, and above Kingsbridge, must be
secured, or there could be no security to an army on the island; but there was
some difference in opinion as to the place. A commanding height, near Morris's
house, some distance below the bridge, within the island, was thought by some,
among whom was Genesis Putnam, a position which, if properly fortified, would be
almost impregnable. While others, among whom was our General, and his brother
Genesis Green, who were generally in sentiment, insisted that there could be no
security on the island, although the post before mentioned was made as strong
as Gibralter, if the heights above the bridge were left unfortified, as the
enemy might at any time, in an hour or two, possess themselves of those heights
above the bridge, and completely entrap the army; and each declared positively,
that he would not rest easy or satisfied, until those grounds were taken
possession of. Fort Washington was begun on the hill first mentioned, and the
works were pushed as fast as possible; and it was determined to erect another
fort above the bridge, which was also begun, and called Independence. Every
exertion was now in exercise to complete the works in and about the city, some
of which were strong. Indeed, immense labor had been bestowed on the works at
the city, on Long Island, at Horn's Hook, near Hell Gate, and at Paulus Hook,
on the Jersey side, opposite the city, on Governor's Island, etc.

11th. -- Our General received a commission from Congress, dated the 9th,
appointing him a Major General in the army of the United States of America.
Generals Spencer, Sullivan and Green, received, at the same time, commissions
of the same tenor.

12th. -- In the afternoon, 30 or 40 British vessels came through the Narrows,
and joined the fleet.

13th. -- A number more of ships, some of them very large, came in and joined
the fleet: the ships up the river fell a little lower down.

14th. -- Our General rode to Horn's Hook and Kingsbridge. The person who had
the direction of the fire-vessels, requested him to be a spectator on the bank
of the river, of an attempt, intended to be made on that night, to burn the
ships. Attended by Genesis Clinton, and several other officers, they waited on the
bank until about midnight; but no attempt on the ships was made, and they
returned disappointed.

16th. -- Our General was again requested to be a spectator on the bank of the
river, the approaching night, with the most positive assurances that he should
not be again disappointed: he accordingly went, attended as on the preceding
time, and took a proper position on the bank. The night was pretty dark; they
soon found that the galleys and fire-vessels were silently moving up, with the
tide. After some time, and almost immediately after the sentinels, on board the
British ships, had passed the word, "all is well," two of the fire-vessels
flashed into a blaze; the one, close on the side of the Phoenix, the other
grappling one of the tenders. To appearance, the flames were against the side
of the Phoenix; and there was much confusion on board. A number of cannon were
discharged into the fire-vessel, in order to sink her. A number of seamen
ascended, and got out on the yardarm, supposed to clear away some grapplings.
The fire-vessel was along side, as was judged, near ten minutes, when the
Phoenix either cut, or slipped her cable, let fall her fore-topsail, wore round,
and stood up the river, being immediately veiled from the spectators, by the
darkness of the night. The tender burnt down to the water's edge, and was towed
to the shore by the Americans; out of which was taken, one iron six-pounder,
two three-pounders, one two-pounder, ten swivels, a caboose, some gun-barrels,
cutlasses, grapplings, chains, etc. The Rose, and the other two tenders,
remained at their moorings; but it was said that one of the tenders was
deserted by her crew, for a time. Several of our galleys were said to have been
inactive; otherwise, a very considerable advantage would have been reaped. The
Americans sustained no loss or injury, saving one man, who, in communicating
fire to one of the vessels, got considerably burnt in the face, hands, etc.

17th. -- The Commander in Chief, having ordered our General to take the
command of the troops and posts, at the north end of the island, and above
Kingsbridge, within which command fell the Forts Washington and Independence,
and a number of other works, he took the command accordingly.

18th. -- Very early in the morning, the wind being pretty fresh, and it being
very rainy, the ships and tenders which were up the river, got under sail, and
ran down, keeping as close under the east bank as they could, in passing our
works. They were, however, briskly cannonaded at Fort Washington; and the works
below were several times struck, but received no material damage. They joined
their fleet near Staten-Island.

19th. -- It was made pretty certain, that the British were upon the point of
making an attack somewhere. By an express, which our General received from Genesis
Washington, at half past 2 o'clock, A. M. of the 22d, he was pleased to
communicate, that, by intelligence which he had received, the enemy had
intentions of making attacks on Long Island, up the North River, upon Bergen
Point, Elizabeth-Town Point, Amboy, etc. Perhaps so many places were mentioned,
in order to divide the force of, and distract the Americans. On this morning,
however, they landed, near Gravesend Bay, on Long Island, about 8,000 men; Col.
Hand, with his rifle corpse, retreating moderately before them, and destroying
some wheat which would fall into their hands. The British advanced as far as
Flatbush, where they halted. Six American regiments were sent over, as a
reinforcement. Genesis Sullivan had the command on the island.

24th. -- There were some skirmishes on Long Island; but nothing very material.

25th. -- A number of the enemy's ships fell down toward the Narrows; it was
supposed, with intent to land more troops on Long Island.

26th. -- In the morning, a brisk cannonade on Long Island, for some time. The
British had thrown up some works, at Flatbush, from which they fired at the
Americans.

27th. -- Early in the morning, two ships and a brig came to anchor a little
above Frog Point. Our General immediately detached Col. Graham with his
regiment, to prevent their landing to plunder or burn. Before he arrived,
several barges full of men landed on New City Island, and killed a number of
cattle. Two companies of the regiment, immediately on their arrival, ferried
over to the island. The enemy carried off one man and 14 cattle -- the
remainder of the cattle were secured.

On the same day, there was a most bloody battle on Long Island, between the
Americans and the British. The British, by a long circuitous march in the night
of the 26th; with a part of their army, found the left of the Americans not so
well secured as it ought to have been; and they had an opportunity to reach
ground, which gave them great advantage, while it equally exposed the Americans
in the strong grounds toward Flatbush. There was here also another
circumstance of ground, which now proved very disadvantageous to the Americans.
There was a considerable marsh, into which a creek ran, and on which there was
a mill, known by the name of M'Gowen's. At the mill there was a passway over;
but unluckily, when some of the Americans had retreated by this mill, (for they
were soon routed by the British, who formed an attack almost in a semicircle)
it was set on fire. This would have been a politic step, had all the Americans
on the other side, in that quarter, previously passed; but those still beyond
the creek were now driven to almost desperate circumstances: they could not
pass at the head of the creek; for the British column, which made the
circuitous movement, were in possession of the ground on the left;
consequently, many were here killed or taken prisoners, and numbers perished in
attempting to get over the creek, some of them sticking in the mud. Those who
escaped retreated to the American works. The British sustained a considerable
loss in killed and wounded, and a subaltern and 23 men were taken prisoners;
but the American loss was far greater, in killed, wounded, and prisoners. Among
the latter were Genesis Sullivan and Lord Sterling. Several field- pieces were
also lost. At evening, the British army encamped in front of the Americans.

On the morning of the 28th, there was a skirmish between the Americans and
British, which terminated rather in favor of the former. The same night, the
British began to open works, at the distance of about 600 yards from the
American works on the left. Genesis Washington wrote to our General, to send down
to the city all the boats that could be spared, from Kingsbridge and Fort
Washington; intimating, that he might possibly find it necessary, at night, to
throw over more troops to Long Island. This order was immediately complied
with, and the boats sent down; while the real intention of their use was fully
understood.

29th. -- The ships in the East River fell down to Hunt's Point. On the same
night, the Americans evacuated Long Island, bringing off their military stores,
provisions, etc. Some heavy cannon were left. In this retreat from the island,
and which was well conducted, an instance of discipline and of true fortitude
was exhibited by the American guards and pickets. In order that the British
should not get knowledge of the withdraw of the Americans, until their main
body had embarked in the boats and pushed off from the shore, (which was a
matter of the highest importance to their safety) the guards were ordered to
continue at their respective posts, with sentinels alert, as if nothing
extraordinary was taking place, until the troops had embarked: they were then
to come off, march briskly to the ferry, and embark themselves. But, somehow or
other, the guards came off, and had got well toward the landing-place, when
they were ordered to face about, march back, and re-occupy their former posts;
which they instantly obeyed, and continued at them, until called off to cross
the ferry. Whoever has seen troops in a similar situation, or duly contemplates
the human heart in such trials, well know how to appreciate the conduct of
these brave men, on this occasion.

31st. -- In the forenoon, the British appeared at Newton, where they pitched a
number of tents. Governor's Island was evacuated the preceding night by the
Americans. It was now evident, that the next object of the enemy would be to
get the city; and it was equally so, that they would land somewhere on the
island without it. This night, several of the regiments of Genesis Misslin's
brigade, of our General's division, lay on the hills toward New York; and Genesis
Clinton's brigade on their arms. The same evening, Hand's, She Is, Magaw's,
Broadhead's, and Miles's battalions, joined our General's division. Some of
these corpse had suffered greatly, in the action on Long Island.

September 1st. -- The British appeared to be encamped in several places on
Long Island. They had run a ship in between Nutten Island and Red Hook.

2d. -- They ran a ship past the city up the East River: she was several times
struck by the shot of a 12 pounder, which was drawn to the river's bank. Major
Crane, of the artillery, was wounded in the foot, by a cannon shot from this
ship. It was now a question, whether to defend the city, or evacuate it, and
occupy the strong grounds above. Every exertion had been made, to render the
works both numerous and strong; and immense labor and expense had been
bestowed on them; and it was now determined that the city should be obstinately
defended.

4th. -- Genesis Washington came up, and dined at our General's quarters. The same
day, a detachment of the artillery, with one 24 pounder, three 12 pounders,
three 3 pounders, and a howitzer, joined the division. The enemy were
plundering cattle on Long Island, now fully in their possession.

5th. -- Our General ordered a chain of videtts and sentinels to be formed at
Morrissania, Hunt's and Frog's Point, etc. The British were pressing a great
number of teams on Long Island -- their Headquarters were at Bedford.

7th. -- The militia on Long Island were ordered to muster, to raise recruits
for the King. The General Officers of the American army were in council, at
Headquarters in New York. The British were now erecting a work, nearly
opposite to our's at Horn's Hook, and the distance not great.

8th. -- The British opened their battery against Horn's Hook Fort. The fire
was briskly returned. The Americans had one man killed, and two wounded.

9th. -- In the morning there was a brisk cannonade on both sides. At Horn's
Hook, the American artillery was so well plied, that the British ceased firing.
The British were said to be encamped in three divisions; one at Newton, which
was Headquarters, one at Flushing, and one at Jamaica.

10th. -- The British landed a number of troops on Montresors Island.

11th. -- The British continued to cannonade and bombard our fort at Horn's
Hook, and to land more troops on Montresors Island.

12th. -- The cannonade continued against our fort at Horn's Hook, and the
British were moving their troops toward the East River. This day, Col. Ward's
regiment of Connecticut troops removed from Burditt's Ferry, and joined our
General's division. The General Officers were in council. A former resolution
to defend the city was rescinded, with three dissentients.

13th. -- Four British ships, one of which was a two-decker, ran by the city up
the East River. The cannonade and bombardment at Horn's Hook continued. This
evening, Col. Chester, with five regiments, joined our General's division.

14th. -- The British sent three or four ships up the North River, as far as
Greenwich. The cannon and stores were removing from New York, during the night.

15th. -- About noon, the British landed at Kepps's Bay. They met with but
small resistance, and pushed toward the city, of which they took possession in
the afternoon. They availed themselves of some cannon and stores; but their
booty was not very great. Here the Americans, we are sorry to say, did not
behave well; and here it was, as fame has said, that Genesis Washington threw his
hat on the ground, and exclaimed, "Are these the men with which I am to defend
America?" But several things may have weight here; -- the wounds received on
Long Island were yet bleeding; and the officers, if not the men, knew that the
city was not to be defended. Maj. Chapman was killed, and Brig. Maj. Wyllis was
taken prisoner. A few others were killed, wounded, and taken prisoners. The
Americans retreated up the island; and some few, who could not get out of the
city that way, escaped in boats over to Paulus Hook, across the river. The
house, in the fort at Horn's Hook, was set on fire by a shell, and burnt down.
The fort was afterward abandoned.

16th. -- A little before noon, a smart skirmish happened on the heights west
of Haarlem Plain, and south of Morris's house, between a party of Hessian
Yagers, British Light-Infantry and Highlanders, and the American riflemen and
some other troops, which ended in favor of the latter. The troops fought well,
on both sides, and gave great proof of their marksmanship. The Americans had
several officers killed and wounded; among the former, Lieut. Col. Knoulton, of
the Connecticut line, and Capt. Gleason, of Nixon's Massachusetts regiment, two
excellent officers; and Maj. Beech, of one of the southern regiments, a brave
officer, was among the latter. This skirmish might have brought on a general
action; for both armies were then within supporting distance of the troops
which were engaged.

It now became an object of high importance, to calculate, if possible, where
the British would make their next attempt; and here the General Officers were
divided in opinion. A part of them imagined, that the British would first
endeavor to make themselves masters of the whole of New York Island, and that,
therefore, the reduction of Fort Washington, and its dependencies, would be
their object. Others supposed, that they would make a landing either at
Morrissania, Hunt's or Frog's Point, which eventually would produce as certain
a reduction of the works on the island, with very little loss to the British.
It was therefore determined in council, to guard against both; and for this
purpose, 10,000 men were to be retained on the island, at and near Fort
Washington. Our General's division was to be augmented to 10,000 men, and a
floating bridge was to be thrown across Haarlem Creek, that these two bodies
might communicate with and support each other, as circumstances might require;
and Major-Gen. Green was to command the flying camp on the Jersey side of the
Hudson, which was to consist of 5,000. The different arrangements took place
accordingly.

17th. -- The remains of Lieut. Col. Knoulton were interred with military
honors. The same day, a troop of militia light horse arrived from Connecticut;
others, and many of the militia were on their way to join the army.

18th. -- Genesis Parsons's and Scott's brigades, and the brigade commanded by
Col. Dudley Sargent, joined our General's division; and She Is, Magaw's,
Haslett's, Atlee's, and Broadhead's battalions were ordered away. The British
army encamped between the American army and the city.

A picket from our General's division, of 450 men, constantly mounted, by
relief, at Morrissania; from which a chain of sentinels, within half gunshot of
each other, were planted, from the one side of the shore to the other, and near
the water passage, between Morrissania and Montresors Island, which in some
places is very narrow. The sentinels on the American side were ordered not to
presume to fire at those of the British, unless the latter began; but the
British were so fond of beginning, that there was frequently a firing between
them. This having been the case one day, and a British officer walking along
the bank, on the Montresors side, an American sentinel, who had been exchanging
some shots with a British sentinel, seeing the officer, and concluding him to
be better game, gave him a shot, and wounded him. He was carried up to the
house on the island, An officer, with a flag, soon came down to the creek, and
called for the American officer of the picket, and informed him, that if the
American sentinels fired any more, the commanding-officer on the island would
cannonade Col. Morris's house, in which the officers of the picket quartered.
The American officer immediately sent up to our General, to know what answer
should be returned. He was directed to inform the British officer, that the
American sentinels had always been instructed not to fire on sentinels, unless
they were first fired upon, and then to return the fire; that such would be
their conduct: as to the cannonading of Col. Morris's house, they might act
their pleasure. The firing ceased for some time; but a raw Scotch sentinel,
having been planted, one day, he very soon after discharged his piece at an
American sentinel, nearest to him, which was immediately returned; upon which a
British officer came down, and called to the American officers, observing that
he thought there was to be no firing between the sentinels. He was answered,
that their own began; upon which he replied, "He shall then pay for it." The
sentinel was directly after relieved, and there was no firing between the
sentinels, at that place, any more; and they were so civil to each other, on
their posts, that one day, at a part of the creek where it was practicable, the
British sentinel asked the American, who was nearly opposite to him, if he
could give him a chew of tobacco: the latter, having in his pocket a piece of a
thick twisted roll, sent it across the creek, to the British sentinel, who,
after taking off his bite, sent the remainder back again.

20th. -- The Commander in Chief, Maj. Genesis Putnam, and some other officers,
came up to our General's division, and rode round the camp, which, by the
return, given in on the next day, consisted of 8,771; but of these there was
1,294 sick present, and 1,108 sick absent.

On the morning of the 21st, between one and two o'clock, the light of a great
fire was discovered to the southward, which proved to be at New York; when a
considerable part of the city was consumed.

22d. -- Two seamen, belonging to the La Brune, a British ship of war, which
lay near Montresors Island, deserted, and came to our General's quarters; and
informed him, upon examination, that the British had then but a few men on the
island, stating the number; that the piece of cannon, which had been put on the
island, was taken back again, on board the La Brune; that there were a number
of officers at the house, in which there was a considerable quantity of baggage
deposited, etc. Our General supposed that these troops might be easily taken;
and, having called the General Officers of his division together, took their
opinion, who all coincided with him in sentiment. He then communicated his
intention to the Commander in Chief, who gave it his approbation. Two hundred
and forty men were destined for this enterprise: the command was given to
Lieut. Col. Michael Jackson, of the Massachusetts line, with Majors Logan and
--, whose name cannot be recollected, of the New York troops. They were to
embark on board three flat-boats, covered by a fourth with a detachment of
artillery, with a light three-pounder, in case it should be found necessary in
retreating from the island. The mode of attack was settled, and every
circumstance secured, to promise success. They were to fall down Haarlem Creek
with the ebb. The time was so calculated, that the young flood was to be so
much made, at the break of day, as to cover the flats at the island,
sufficiently for the boats to float. Matters being thus settled, our General
ordered the two sailors to be brought in: he then told them, that in
consequence of their information, an enterprise against the British troops on
Montresors Island, was to take place that night; that he had ordered them to be
kept in safe custody until the next morning, when, if their declarations
respecting the state of the British on the island, proved to be true, he would
give them a passport to the back country, whither they wished to go; but, in
case their information was false, he would order them hanged immediately, as
spies; that he gave them the opportunity, if they had made a wrong statement to
him, then to correct it. They both answered, with perfect composure, that they
would cheerfully submit to the condition. Major Thomas Henly was now one of our
General's Aids-de-camp. He importuned that he might go with the detachment. He
was refused, and told that he had no business there; that he could exercise no
command. He grew quite impatient, returned again to the General's room, and
addressed him: "Pray, Sir, consent to my going with the party -- let me have
the pleasure of introducing the prisoners to you tomorrow." All his friends
present advised him not to go. The General finally consented. The troops, at
the hour assigned, embarked. Our General informed them, that he, with others,
would be spectators of the scene, from a certain point near Haarlem Creek.
Notice had been given to the guards and pickets on the York Island side, not to
hail the party as they went down. Unfortunately, the lower sentinel had not
been so instructed. He was nearly opposite to the point where our General was
to be; and just at the instant when he arrived, had challenged the boats, and
ordered them to come to the shore. From the boats they answered, "Lo! we are
friends." The challenge was repeated. The answer was, "We tell you we are
friends -- hold your tongue." A bounce into the water was heard; and instantly
Maj. Henly came wading to the shore, stepped up to our General, catched him by
the hand, and said, "Sir, will it do?" Our General, holding him by the hand,
replied, "I see nothing to the contrary;" to which Henly concluded by saying,
"Then it shall do." He waded back to his boat, and got in. The sentinel called
again: "If you don't come to the shore, I tell you I Will fire." A voice from
some one in the boats, was, "Pull away!" The boats went on, and the sentinel
fired his piece. The boats reached the island almost at the moment intended,
just as the glimmer of the dawn was discoverable. The three field-officers were
in the first boats. Their intention, on the moment of landing, was, for the two
seconds in command to spring, the one to the right, and the other to the left,
and lead on the troops from the other two boats, which were to land on each
side of the first boat. The field-officers landed, and the men from their boat.
The enemy's guard charged them, but were instantly driven back. The men in the
other two boats, instead of landing, lay upon their oars. The British, seeing
this, returned warmly to the charge. The Americans, finding themselves thus
deserted, returned to their boat; but not until Lieut. Col. Jackson received a
musket-ball in his leg, and Maj. Henly, as he was getting into the boat, one
through his heart, which put an instant end to his life. The boat joined the
others, and they all returned, having, in the whole, about 14 killed, wounded,
and missing; Maj. Henly deeply regretted. Had only one of the other boats
landed her men, the success would have been very probable; but the two would
have insured an execution of the whole plan, in the opinion of all concerned.
The delinquents in the other boats were arrested, and tried by court martial,
and one of the Captains cashiered.

On the night of the 23d, the British got possession of the works at Paulus
Hook. The Americans had previously taken off all the cannon and stores. On the
afternoon of the 24th, the remains of Maj. Henly were interred by the side of
Lieut. Col. Knoulton, on New York Island, with military honors.

25th. -- The militia, which had come out from the western parts of the State
of Connecticut, were discharged.

26th. -- The General Officers were in council with a committee of Congress,
sent to make inquiry into the condition of the army, and agree upon the
necessary augmentation.

27th. -- The Council set again. The same day, Maj. Genesis Sullivan, who had for
some time been a prisoner with the British, came to Headquarters. The American
prisoners, which were taken in Canada, were sent round by water, and landed at
Bergen Point, New Jersey, where they were set at liberty. Genesis Thompson was
among them.

28th. -- Seven recruits for Maj. Rogers's corpse, raising for British service,
were taken, going to Long Island, and sent in.

29th. -- There was an unusual movement of boats from Long Island to Montresors
Island, and an attack was soon expected.

30th. -- The moving over of boats to Montresors Island continued. The same
day, a frigate went through Hell Gate, and came to anchor about 10 o'clock, A.
M. near the La Brune. At 12. o'clock, she came to sail, and stood to the
eastward. Just at evening another ship came up; and the next morning,

October 1st, was at anchor in the channel, between Haarlem and Baman's or
Eldridge's Island.

3d. -- The Brigadier-Generals of our General's division were in council, and
several new works were laid out; among others, a redoubt on the hill above
Williams's Bridge. Our General, in reconnoitring his position, accompanied by
Col. Hand, below the camp of the rifle corpse, being apprehensive that the
British might land on Frog's Neck, took a view of the causeway between
West-Chester and the point. Upon the neck, which runs between these two, is a
tide-mill; and a plank bridge at the mill, at the west end of the causeway,
(the side of the American army) was at this time a range of cord-wood, as
advantageously situated to cover a party to defend the pass, as if constructed
for the very purpose. After taking a full view, our General directed Col. Hand,
immediately upon his return to his camp, to fix upon one of the best subaltern
officers, and 25 picked men of his corpse, and assign them to this pass, as
their alarm-post at all times; and, in case the enemy made a landing on Frog's
Neck, to direct this officer immediately to take up the planks of the bridge;
to have every thing in readiness to set the mill on fire; but not to do it,
unless the fire of the riflemen should appear insufficient to check the advance
of the enemy on to the causeway; to assign another party to the head of the
creek; to reinforce both, in case the enemy landed; and that he should be
supported. Col. Hand made his arrangements accordingly.

4th. -- The brig and tenders in the East River came down, and cast anchor near
the La Brune frigate; and the Roebuck and Phoenix sailed up the North River, and
joined the other ships which lay at anchor there.

5th. -- There were some movements among the British; and a party appeared to
be very busy at work, a little below Haarlem. The same night, the Americans
left the heights of Bergen. They were upwards of 2,000 strong. They retreated
as far back as Burditt's Ferry.

6th. -- Orders were given for throwing up a new work on Haarlem Creek, below
the wood at Morrissania.

7th. -- Genesis Lincoln came to camp. He had come from Massachusetts with a body
of militia. This was the first of his joining the main army. The same day, the
British were putting over horses from Horn's Hook to Long Island, and fixing
their pontoons.

9th. -- Early in the morning, three ships, two of 40 guns, and one frigate,
with two or three tenders, stood up the North River. They were briskly
cannonaded from Fort Washington and Fort Constitution. They however passed our
works and the chevaux-de-frise; the American galleys, small craft, and two
large ships standing on before them. The two ships were ran on shore near
Phillips's mills, and two of the galleys near Dobb's Ferry. The enemy took
possession of the two galleys, and got them off. A boat landed a number of men,
who plundered a store, stove the casks, and then set the store on fire, and
left it. The Americans soon extinguished the fire.

Our General ordered Col. Sargent, with 500 infantry, 40 light horse, Capt.
Horton of the artillery, with two 12 pounders, and Capt. Crafts with a
howitzer, to march immediately, with all possible expedition, to Dobb's Ferry.
The enemy took a schooner loaded with rum, sugar, wine, etc. and sunk a sloop,
which had on board the machine, invented by, and under the direction of, a Mr.
Bushnell, intended to blow up the British ships. This machine was worked under
water. It conveyed a magazine of powder, which was to be fixed under the keel
of a ship, then freed from the machine, and left with clock-work going, which
was to produce fire when the machine had got out of the way. Mr. Bushnell had
great confidence of its success, and had made several experiments which seemed
to give him countenance; but its fate was truly a contrast to its design.

Our General's division was formed in line, with its advance, reserve
flank-guards, and artillery, all in order of battle, when they were moved down
over the different grounds, which it was supposed might be the scene of action.
Some of this ground was very broken, and there were many fences. These afforded
frequent opportunities for the troops to break off and form; for the pioneers
to open avenues, etc. and for the whole to become acquainted with every part of
the ground, and the best choice of it, if suddenly called to action.

10th. -- One of the ships which was ran a-ground, was got off by the
Americans. Col. Sargent returned, having left 180 men to watch the motions of
the British up the river.

11th. -- There was a considerable movement among the British boats below. This
afternoon, Genesis Washington's pleasure-boat, coming down the river with a fresh
breeze, and a topsail hoisted, was supposed, by the artillerists at Mount
Washington, to be one of the British tenders running down. A 12 pounder was
discharged at her, which was so exactly pointed, as unfortunately to kill three
Americans, who were much lamented. The same day, several of Genesis Lincoln's
regiments arrived, two of which were posted on the North River.

12th. -- Early in the morning, 80 or 90 British boats, full of men, stood up
the sound, from Montresors Island, Long Island, etc. The troops landed at
Frog's Neck, and their advance pushed toward the causeway and bridge, at
West-Chester mill. Col. Hand's riflemen took up the planks of the bridge, as
had been directed, and commenced a firing with their rifles. The British moved
toward the head of the creek, but found here also the Americans in possession
of the pass. Our General immediately (as he had assured Col. Hand he would do)
ordered Col. Prescott, the hero of Bunker Hill, with his regiment, and Capt.
Lieut. Bryant of the artillery, with a 3 pounder, to reinforce the riflemen at
West-Chester causeway; and Col. Graham of the New York line, with his regiment,
and Lieut. Jackson of the artillery, with a 6 pounder, to reinforce at the head
of the creek; all of which was promptly done, to the check and disappointment
of the enemy. The British encamped on the neck. The riflemen and Yagers kept up
a scattering popping at each other across the marsh; and the Americans on their
side, and the British on the other, threw up a work at the end of the causeway.
Capt. Bryant, now and then, when there was an object, saluted the British with
a field-piece.

In the afternoon, 40 or 50 sail of vessels passed up, and came to anchor off
Frog's Point. The same evening, Genesis M'Dougal's brigade joined our General's
division.

13th. -- The brigade, formerly under the command of our General, when he was
Brigadier, joined his division. The division now became very strong. The
General Officers of the army were this day in council, at our General's
Quarters.

14th. -- Our General, with the Generals under his command, reconnoitred the
enemy at Frog's Neck; afterward, the General Officers of the army reconnoitred
the various grounds. The same day, Maj. Genesis Lee was ordered to the command of
the troops above Kingsbridge, now become the largest part of the American army.
But Genesis Washington had desired him not to exercise the command for a day or
two, until he could make himself acquainted with the post, its circumstances,
and arrangements of duty. A great number of sloops, boats, etc. were passing
the sound eastward, just at dusk -- probably conveying ammunition, provisions,
etc. to the troops at Frog's Point.

15th. -- Five sailors came off from the La Brune. They informed, that there
was a large body of the British on Frog's Point, and that an attack might be
soon expected. The scattering fire across the marsh continued, and now and then
a man was killed.

16th. -- Two works were discovered on Frog's Neck, nearly finished. The
General Officers of the army rode to reconnoitre the ground at Pell's Neck,
etc. and it was determined that the position of the American army should be
immediately changed; the left flank to be extended more northerly, to prevent
its being turned by the British.

17th. -- Wadsworth's and Fellows's brigades, came to Kingsbridge. The British
shipping, etc. continued moving eastward.

18th. -- The regiment at West-Chester causeway had been relieved by another.
The officer on command there, this morning, sent up an express to our General,
informing him that the British were opening an embrasure in their work at the
end of the causeway, and that he apprehended they intended, under a cannonade
from this, to attempt to pass. Our General ordered one of his Aids to gallop
his horse to the officer commanding the brigade, near Volentine's, the nearest
to West-Chester, and order him to form his brigade instantly. Arriving,
himself, by the time the brigade was formed, he ordered the officer to march,
with the utmost expedition, to the head of the causeway, to reinforce the
troops there; himself moving on with them. When the troops had advanced to
about half the way between the head of the creek, and the post at the head of
the causeway, another express met him, informing him that the whole British
army were in motion, and seemed to be moving toward the pass at the head of
the creek. Upon this, the brigade was ordered to halt, the whole to prime and
load, and the rear regiment to file off by the left, and march briskly to
reinforce the Americans at the pass, at the head of the creek. At this instant,
Genesis Washington came up, and having inquired of our General, the state of
things, ordered him to return immediately, and have his division formed ready
for action, and to take such a position as might appear best calculated to
oppose the enemy, should they attempt to land another body of troops on
Morrissania, which he thought not improbable. Our General immediately obeyed
the order.

The wind was now fresh at south-west. The British crossed to the other side of
Frog's Neck, embarked on board their boats, crossed over the cove, landed on
Pell's Neck, and moved briskly upwards. Three or four of the American regiments
advanced toward them, and took a good position behind a stone fence. When the
British had advanced sufficiently near, they gave them a pretty close fire,
which checked them, and even obliged them to fall back; but being immediately
supported, they returned vigorously to the charge. The action was sharp, for a
short time; but the Americans were soon obliged to give way to superior force.
Shepard's, Read's, Baldwin's, and Glover's regiments, had the principal share
in this action. The Americans had between 30 and 40 men killed and wounded;
among the latter, Col. Shepard, in the throat, not mortally, although the ball
came well nigh effecting instant death. The loss of the British was not known,
but must have been considerable. They advanced almost to New Rochelle, and
halted. The American army extended its left.

A number of boats went down toward New York. It now became necessary,
immediately to quit the position in the neighborhood of Kingsbridge, the
British being in the rear of the left of our army; and it is not a little
unaccountable, that they did not attempt to stretch themselves across to the
Hudson, which might have been done with great ease. They only moved higher up,
on the other side of the little rivulet Brunx, which was generally fordable.
The White Plains were fixed upon for the next position of the American army. A
strong garrison was to be left at Fort Washington, and our General was to leave
one of his regiments, to garrison Fort Independence.

21st. -- At about 4 o'clock, P. M. our General's division moved from above
Kingsbridge, having, besides their light fieldpieces, two heavy iron
twelvepounders. About 8 o'clock in the evening, they passed Genesis Lincoln's
quarters, on Volentine's Hill, where the Commander in Chief was to spend the
night. Our General waited upon him, to know if he had any particular commands
for him. The Commander in Chief only advised to send forward one of his
regiments, to occupy the road coming from Ward's Bridge, nearly to whose farm
the British had now advanced; left, apprised of his moving, they should annoy
his right flank, which, if it had been daylight, would have been open to their
view: But before the column reached this cross road, it was learnt, that Col.
Jonathan Brewer's regiment of artificers, who were pretty strong, and well
armed, were to pass the night at the entrance of the road, leading to the
bridge before mentioned. The division reached Chaderton's Hill, to the south of
White Plains, at 4 o'clock in the morning of the 22d, having marched all night.
The instant our General ascended the hill, he noticed, to appearance, many
flashes, resembling the flash of the pan of a musket, on the other side of the
lot; on which he immediately ordered a Captain, with a party, to discover what
it was; who returned, that he could not make discovery of any thing. These were
indeed the flashes of discharged muskets at some distance; the height of ground
having decoyed the appearance of the distance. Lord Sterling, who was before in
this vicinity with his brigade, had formed an enterprise against Maj. Rogers's
corpse. The old Indian hunter in the last French war, who had now engaged in the
British service, with his corpse, now lay on the out-post of the British army,
near Marroneck. The enterprise was conducted with good address; and if the
Americans had known exactly how Rogers's corpse lay, they would probably have
killed or taken the whole. As it was, 36 prisoners, 60 muskets, and some other
articles, were taken. The Major, conformably to his former general conduct,
escaped with the rest of his corpse. This was a pretty affair; and if the writer
could recollect the name of the commanding-officer, with pride and pleasure he
would insert it. He belonged to one of the southern lines of the army; and the
whole of the party were southern troops.

The same day, our General moved his division, and took post on the high strong
ground, to the north of the courthouse. Genesis Sullivan's division reached the
Plains in the course of the succeeding night. In the position of White Plains,
our General's division was on the left of the line. On his left was a deep
hollow, through which ran a small brook, which came from a mill-pond, a little
above. On the east side of this hollow was a very commanding ground, which
would enfilade the division. The top of this high ground was covered with wood.
To this hill he ordered Col. Malcolm, with his regiment of New York troops, and
Lieut. Fenno of the artillery, with a field-piece, directing them to take post
in the skirt of the wood, at the south brow of the hill. The ground, from our
General's left to the right, descended gradually a very considerable distance,
and then gradually ascended up to the plain, and still on to the right, to more
commanding ground. On this was the American army formed, the line running
nearly from north-east to south-west. There were some strong works thrown up on
the plain, across the road, and still to the right of it. Chaderton's Hill was
a little advanced of the line, and separated from it by the little rivulet
Brunx. A body of the Americans were posted on this hill. Headquarters were on
the plain, near the cross roads. Our General's division had only slight works
for musketry.

23d. -- A cannonade was heard toward the Hudson. The same evening, Col.
Tyler's, Huntington's and Throop's regiments, of General Parsons's brigade, and
of our General's division, moved, and took post at the head of King Street,
near Rye Pond. Genesis Lee's division had not yet got up to the army.

24th. -- At 5 o'clock, A. M. a firing of smallarms was heard to the southward.
It was a skirmish between 200 men of Genesis Lee's division, and 250 Hessians --
10 of the latter were killed, and two taken prisoners. The British continued
moving up, but with great caution, their rear scarcely advancing, when they
came to encamp again, much further than where the advance had moved from --
they advanced in two columns.

25th. -- Eight American regiments were ordered to be ready to march in the
approaching night. Genesis Putnam was to command them; and they were intended to
make an attack on the enemy's advance, if it should appear to be practicable.
The same morning, one 12 pounder at Dobb's Ferry drove the British man-of-war
off that place from her station.

26th. -- Genesis Lee's division jointed the army. In ascending some of the hills
on the road, this division, encumbered with many wagons, was obliged to halt,
and double the teams, in open view of the British, and at no considerable
distance, who did not attempt to disturb them; which, had they done, the loss
of the cannon, wagons, etc. could not have been avoided. The troops would have
bent their march unencumbered toward the Hudson; but the wagons, etc. must
have been left. Two or three British soldiers and a Hessian were taken
prisoners, and sent in.

27th. -- In the forenoon, a heavy cannonade was heard toward Fort Washington.
Thirteen Hessians and two or three British soldiers were sent in on this day.
From the American camp to the west-south- west, there appeared to be a very
commanding height, worthy of attention. The Commander in Chief ordered the
General Officers who were off duty, to attend him to reconnoitre this ground,
on this morning. When arrived at the ground, although very commanding, it did
not appear so much so, as other grounds to the north, and almost parallel with
the left of the army, as it was then formed. "Yonder," says Major-Gen. Lee,
pointing to the grounds just mentioned, "is the ground we ought to occupy."
"Let us then go and view it," replied the Commander in Chief. When on the way,
a light-horseman came up in full gallop, his horse almost out of breath, and
addressed Genesis Washington -- "The British are on the camp, Sir." The General
observed -- "Gentlemen, we have now other business than reconnoitring," putting
his horse in full gallop for the camp, and followed by the other officers. When
arrived at Headquarters, the Adjutant-General [Read,] who had remained at
camp, informed the Commander in Chief, that the guards had been all beat in,
and the whole American army were now at their respective posts, in order of
battle. The Commander in Chief turned round to the officers, and only said,
"Gentlemen, you will repair to your respective posts, and do the best you can."
Our General, on arriving at his own division, found them all in the lines; and,
from the height of his post, found that the first attack was directed against
the Americans on Chaderton's Hill. The little river Brunx, which ran between
the American right and this hill, after running round its north side, turned
and ran down on the east and south-east, The British advanced in two columns.
At this instant, the cannonade was brisk on both sides; directed by the British
across the hollow and Brunx, against the Americans on the hill, and by them
returned. Almost at the same instant, the right column, composed of British
troops, preceded by about 20 light horse in full gallop, and brandishing their
swords, appeared on the road leading to the courthouse, and now directly in
the front of our General's division. The light horse leaped the fence of a
wheat-field, at the foot of the hill, on which Col. Malcolm's regiment was
posted; of which the light horse were not aware, until a shot from Lieut.
Fenno's field-piece gave them notice, by striking in the midst of them, and a
horseman pitching from his horse. They then wheeled short about, galloped out
of the field as fast as they came in, rode behind a little hill in the road,
and faced about; the tops of their caps only being visible to our General,
where he stood. The column came no further up the road, but wheeled to the left
by platoons, as they came up; and, passing through a bar, or gateway, directed
their head toward the troops on Chaderton's Hill, now engaged. When the head
of the column had got nearly across the lot, their front got out of sight; nor
could the extent of their rear be now discovered. The sun shone bright, their
arms glittered, and perhaps troops never were shown to more advantage, than
these now appeared. The whole now halted; and for a few minutes, the men all
sat down in the same order in which they stood, no one appearing to move out of
his place. The cannonade continued brisk across the Brunx. A part of the left
column, composed of British and Hessians, forded the river, and marched along
under the cover of the hill, until they had gained sufficient ground to the
left of the Americans; when, by facing to the left, their column became a line,
parallel with the Americans. When they briskly ascended the hill, the first
column resumed a quick march. As the troops, which were advancing to the
attack, ascended the hill, the cannonade on the side of the British ceased; as
their own men became exposed to their fire, if continued. The fire of
small-arms was now very heavy, and without any distinction of sounds. This led
some American officers, who were looking on, to observe that the British were
worsted, as their cannon had ceased firing; but a few minutes evinced that the
Americans were giving way. They moved off the hill in a great body, neither
running, nor observing the best order. The British ascended the hill very
slowly; and when arrived at its summit, formed and dressed their line, without
the least attempt to pursue the Americans. The loss on the side of the
Americans was inconsiderable; that of the British was not then known. The
British having got possession of this hill, it gave them a vast advantage of
the American lines, almost down to the center.

29th. -- The British began to throw up some small works on the hill, of which
they had got possession. The Americans were drawing back; and a position was to
be taken on the high strong grounds, before in the rear of a part of the army.
The left of our General's division was not to move; but the remainder of his
division, and all the other divisions of the army, were to fall back and form,
nearly east and west. About this time, Col. Lasher, who belonged to our
General's division, (and who had been lest with his regiment to garrison Fort
Independence, near Kingsbridge) sent an express, who passed the enemy in the
night, to know what he should do, the regiment growing weak and sickly. Our
General applied to the Commander in Chief, to know his pleasure, who directed,
that the Colonel should give notice to Col. Magaw, who commanded at Fort
Washington, that he might take away the cannon, stores, etc. and that Col.
Lasher, after destroying the barracks, huts, etc. should join the army, which
he soon effected. This day, 3 prisoners were sent in; and the Americans were
now throwing up some strong works on the high grounds.

30th. -- The British remained upon the ground they had taken.

31st. -- The British continued as before, throwing up a work, etc. At night,
the Americans evacuated their works on the plain, near late Headquarters,
setting fire to several barns, and one house, which contained forage, and some
stores that could not be removed.

November 1st. -- In the morning, the British advanced with a number of
fieldpieces, to the north of the road, near late Headquarters, (a heavy
column appearing behind on the hill, ready to move forward) and commenced a
furious cannonade on our General's division, which was nobly returned by Capt.
Lieut. Bryant and Lieut. Jackson, of the artillery. Our General's first
anxiety, was for Col. Malcolm's regiment on the hill, to the east of the hollow
on the left, lest the enemy should push a column into the hollow, and cut the
regiment off from the division. He therefore ordered Maj. Keith, one of his
Aids, to gallop over, and order Col. Malcolm to come off immediately, with
Lieut. Fenno's artillery: But, upon a more critical view of the ground in the
hollow, (at the head of which there was a heavy stone wall, well situated to
cover a body of troops to throw a heavy fire directly down it, while an oblique
fire could be thrown in on both sides) he ordered Maj. Pollard, his other aid,
to gallop after Keith, and countermand the first order, and direct the Colonel
to remain at his post, and he should be supported. A strong regiment was
ordered to the head of the hollow, to occupy the wall. The cannonade was brisk
on both sides, through which the two Aids-de-camp passed, in going and
returning. At this instant, Genesis Washington rode up to the hill. His first
question to our General, was, "H^^ is your division?" He was answered, "They
are all in order." "Have you," said the Commander in Chief, "any troops on the
hill over the hollow?" He was answered, "Malcolm's regiment is there." "If you
do not call them off immediately," says the General, "you may lose them, if the
enemy push a column up the hollow." He was answered, that even in that case,
their retreat should be made safe; that a strong regiment was posted at the
head of the hollow, behind the wall; that this regiment, with the oblique fire
of the division, would so check the enemy, as to allow Malcolm to make a safe
retreat. The Commander in Chief concluded by saying, "Take care that you do not
lose them." The artillery of the division was so well directed, as to throw the
British artillery-men several times into confusion; and finding that they could
not here make any impression, drew back their pieces, the column not advancing.
The British artillery now made a circuitous movement, and came down toward the
American right. Here, unknown to them, were some 12 pounders; upon the
discharge of which, they made off with their fieldpieces as fast as their
horses could draw them. A shot from the American cannon, at this place, took
off the head of a Hessian artillery-man. They also left one of the artillery
horses dead on the field. What other loss they sustained was not known. Of our
General's division, one man only, belonging to Col. Paulding's regiment of
New York troops, was killed. The British made no other attempt on the
Americans, while they remained at White Plains. The two armies lay looking at
each other, and within long cannon-shot. In the night time, the British lighted
up a vast number of fires, the weather growing pretty cold. These fires, some
on the level ground, some at the foot of the hills, and at all distances to
their brows, some of which were lofty, seemed to the eye to mix with the stars,
and to be of different magnitudes. The American side, doubtless, exhibited to
them a similar appearance. On this day, our General ordered three redoubts,
with a line in front, to be thrown up on the summit of his post, so
constructed, that the whole of them could make a defense, and support each
other at the same time, if attacked. These, to the enemy, in whose view they
fully were, must have appeared very formidable, although they were designed
principally for defense against small-arms; and perhaps works were never raised
quicker. There were the stalks of a large corn-field at the spot: the pulling
these up in hills, took up a large lump of earth with each. The roots of the
stalks and earth on them, placed in the face of the works, answered the purpose
of sods, or facines. The tops being placed inwards, as the loose earth was
thrown upon them, became as so many ties to the work, which was carried up with
a dispatch scarcely conceivable.

The British, as they say, had meditated an attack on the Americans, which was
only prevented by the wetness of the night. Be this as it may, our General had
ordered his division, at evening roll-call, to be at their alarm-posts, (which
they every morning manned, whilst at this place) half an hour sooner than
usual. He had then no other reason for doing this, than the near position of
the enemy, and the probability that they would soon make an attack: But the
Commander in Chief must have made some other discovery; for, after our General
was in bed, Col. Carey, who was one of the Aids-de-camp of Genesis Washington,
came to the door of his marque, and calling to him, informed him that the whole
army were to be at their alarm-posts, the next morning, half an hour sooner
than usual, and that he was to govern himself accordingly. Our General replied,
that he had fortunately given such orders to his division, at evening
roll-call. He therefore neither got up himself, nor disturbed any other of his
division. Stedman mistakes greatly in his history, where, in vol. I. page 216,
he asserts, that the Americans "evacuated their lines on the morning of the
first, and retired across the Croten River to North-Castle, setting fire, in
their retreat, to all the houses on White Plains." The Americans did not quit
their strong position at the back of White Plains, until the British had
retreated toward Kingsbridge, as far as Dobb's Ferry, and had there encamped,
as is fully shown in these Memoirs.


3d. -- The sentinels reported, that, during the preceding night, they heard
the rumbling of carriages to the south-eastward; and it was apprehended that
the British were changing their position.

5th. -- The British sentinels were withdrawn from their advanced posts. It was
apprehended that they meant a movement. The American army was immediately
ordered under arms. At 2 o'clock, P. M. the enemy appeared, formed on
Chaderton's Hill, and on several hills to the westward of it. Several
reconnoitring parties, who were sent out, reported that the enemy were
withdrawing. About 12 o'clock, this night, a party of the Americans wantonly
set fire to the courthouse, Dr. Graham's house, and several other private
houses, which stood between the two armies. This gave great disgust to the
whole American army, and drew from the Commander in Chief the following
paragraph, in his orders of the 6th: "It is with the utmost astonishment and
abhorrence, the General is informed, that some base and cowardly wretches have,
last night, set fire to the courthouse, and other buildings which the enemy
left. The army may rely upon it, that they shall be brought to justice, and
meet with the punishment they deserve."

The British were moving down toward Dobb's Ferry. A detachment from the
American army was sent out in the morning to harass their rear, but could not
come up with them.

7th. -- Several deserters came in from the enemy: they reported that they were
removing toward New York. The reconnoitring parties discovered them encamped
near Dobb's Ferry. They were foraging grain and hay, and driving in the cattle.
Two store-ships had run up past Fort Washington.

8th. -- The enemy continued encamped at and below Dobb's Ferry. A new
disposition of the American army was now to take place. The southern troops
were to cross over into the Jersies. Genesis Lee, with his own, Spencer's, and
Sullivan's divisions, were to remain, to secure and bring off the stores; and
were then to follow into the Jersies. Our General was ordered to march with his
division to Peek's Kill.

9th. -- The division moved from near White Plains, and the same night halted
at North-Castle.

10th. -- In the afternoon, the division reached Peck's Kill. Genesis Washington
arrived at the same place about sunset. It was this day learnt, that Genesis
Carleton's army in Canada, after pushing the Americans, in that quarter, from
post to post, until they arrived at Ticonderoga, just made their appearance
before that place, and then retired toward Quebec.

11th. -- The Commander in Chief directed our General to attend him in taking a
view of Fort Montgomery, and the other works up the river. Lord Sterling,
Generals James and George Clinton, Genesis Mifflin and others were of the company.
They went as far up the river as Constitution Island, which is opposite to
West-Point, the latter of which was not then taken possession of; but the
glance of the eye at it, without going on shore, evinced that this post was not
to be neglected. There was a small work and a block-house on Constitution
Island. Fort Montgomery was in considerable forwardness.

12th. -- The Commander in Chief directed our General to ride early in the
morning with him, to reconnoitre the grounds at the Gorge of the Highlands;
and, on his return, gave him the command of the troops and posts in the
Highlands, on both sides of the river, with written instructions to secure and
fortify them with all possible expedition, making a distribution of his troops
to the different posts; and, at about 10 o'clock, A. M. Genesis Washington crossed
over the river into the Jersies.

13th. -- Our General made a disposition of the troops under his command, to
their several destinations. Col. Huntington's and Tyler's regiments, to the
west side of the Hudson, to Sidnum's Bridge on Ramapaugh River, to cover the
passes into the Highlands, on that side: Prescott's, Ward's and Wyllis's
regiments, of Parsons's brigade, (as were the other two regiments) to the south
entrance of the Highlands, beyond Robinson's Bridge: Genesis George Clinton's
brigade, to the heights above Peek's Kill Landing: Genesis Scott's brigade, with
the three regiments of Genesis Parsons's brigade: Genesis James Clinton, with the
troops under his command, were at the forts up the river. The British moved
down, near to Kingsbridge.

On the 16th, the British made their attack on Fort Washington. Genesis
Knyphausen, with a heavy column of Hessians, advanced by Kingsbridge. They were
discovered by the Americans, from the high grounds north of Fort Washington, as
the day broke; and cannonaded from the fieldpieces, placed at this advanced
post. The Hessian column divided into two; the right ascending the strong
broken ground toward Spitten-Devil Creek; the left nearer to the road, toward
the Gorge. The first obtained the ground without much difficulty; but the
Americans made a most noble opposition against the latter, and, for a
considerable time, kept them from ascending the hill, making a terrible
slaughter among them; but the great superiority of the assailants, with an
unabating firmness, finally prevailed: their loss was greater here than at any
other place. Meanwhile, the British crossed Haarlem Creek, in two different
places, charged, and finally routed the Americans on that side, and possessed
themselves of the strong post of Laurel Hill, on the other side of the road,
from Fort Washington, and not very distant from it; Lord Percy at the same time
advancing, with the troops under his command on the island, toward the fort on
that side. The Americans, now generally driven from their outworks, retired to
the fort, which was crowded full. A single shell, now dropping among them, must
have made dreadful havoc.

Genesis Washington was now a spectator of this distressing scene, from the high
bank at Fort Lee, on the opposite side of the Hudson; and having a wish to
communicate something to Col. Magaw, the commanding officer at Fort Washington,
Capt. Gooch of Boston, a brave and daring man, offered to be the bearer of it.
He ran down to the river, jumped into a small boat, pushed over the river,
landed under the bank, ran up to the fort, and delivered the message -- came
out, ran and jumped over the broken ground, dodging the Hessians, some of whom
struck at him with their pieces, and others attempted to thrust him with their
bayonets -- escaping through them, he got to his boat, and returned to Fort
Lee. The British had summoned Col. Magaw to surrender, and were preparing their
batteries to play on the fort, when Col. Magaw thought it best to surrender the
post, which he did accordingly, between two and three thousand men becoming
prisoners. The loss in killed and wounded, on the American side was
inconsiderable; but the loss in prisoners was a serious blow indeed. The
prisoners were marched to New York; where, being crowded in prisons and
sugar-houses, (many of them being militia from the Jersey flying-camp, who had
been sent over to reinforce the garrison, and were unused to a soldier's life,
much less to the poisonous stagnant air of a crowded prison,) they fell sick,
and daily died, in a most shocking manner. It was common, on a morning, for the
car-men to come and take away the bodies for burial, by loads! -- O ye officers
of the provost! to whatever nation or people you belong, when the unfortunate
of your fellow-men are thus committed to your charge, clothe yourselves with
humanity, and soothe distress as far as in your power; for by this, you will
secure a better reward than your present wages. And you who have the honor to
command armies, when your victories have filled provosts and prisons, think it
not beneath you to visit the prisons, that with your own eyes you may see the
state of your prisoners: for such visits, the great CAPTAIN OF YOUR SALVATION
has said, shall be considered as made to Himself; while it also gives you a
name among men closely allied to that of the conqueror. The truly brave are
always humane.

Elated with the easy reduction of Fort Washington, the British determined to
cross into the Jersies, and attack Genesis Washington on that side.

On the 18th, Lord Cornwallis, with a strong body of the British forces, landed
at Closter Landing, on the Jersey side, above Fort Lee, the garrison of which
were obliged to leave that post; and some cannon, stores and provisions, which
could not be removed, fell into the hands of the enemy.

20th. -- Just at evening, an express, which our General had sent down to Genesis
Washington before he had any knowledge of what had happened, returned with a
most alarming account of what he had seen with his own eyes, viz. that the
Americans were rapidly retreating, and the British as rapidly pursuing. The
Adjutant-General [Read] wished to write to Genesis Lee; but he had neither pen,
ink, or paper with him. The light-horseman had a rough piece of wrapping-paper
in his pocket, and the Adjutant-General had an old pencil. Bringing these two
together, he wrote to Genesis Lee -- "Dear General, we are flying before the
British. I pray" -- and the pencil broke. He then told the light-horseman to
carry the paper to Genesis Lee, and tell him that he was verbally ordered to add,
after I pray, "you to push and join us." The light-horseman, when he arrived at
our General's, was both fatigued and wet. He requested that one of his brother
horsemen might proceed to Genesis Lee; but he was told that no other could
discharge the duty enjoined on him by the Adjutant-General, and that Genesis Lee
might wish to make many inquiries of him. He was therefore refreshed and pushed
on. Genesis Lee, instead of moving his division, or any part of it, wrote our
General, by the returning express, the following letter.

CAMP, Nov. 21st, 1776. DEAR GENERAL,
I HAVE just received a recommendation, not a positive order, from the General,
to move the corpse under my command to the other side of the river. This
recommendation was, I imagine, on the presumption that I had already moved
nearer to Peek's Kill. There is no possibility of crossing over Dobb's Ferry,
or at any place lower than King's Ferry, which to us would be such an immense
round, that we could never answer any purpose. I must therefore desire and
request, that you will order 2,000 of your corpse, under a Brigadier-General, to
cross the river opposite the General, and wait his further orders. As soon as
we have finished a necessary job, I will replace this number from hence, which
job will, I believe, be finished tomorrow.

I am, dear General, yours, (Signed) CHARLES LEE.

Genesis HEATH.

Upon receiving this letter from Genesis Lee, (for our General did not receive the
least hint from Genesis Washington, to move any part of the troops under his
command, by the express who brought the order to Lee) he took up his
instructions from Genesis Washington, to see if he might dare to make any
detachment; upon which he wrote Genesis Lee the following answer to his letter.

PEEK'S KILL, Nov. 21st, 1776, 10 o'clock at night. DEAR GENERAL,
I AM now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors, of this date, the former
of which I had answered early in the evening. With respect to the latter, upon
having recourse to my instructions, I find they are such as not to admit of
moving any part of the troops from the posts assigned to me, unless it be by
express orders from his Excellency, or to support you, in case you are
attacked. My instructions, among other things, are as follow: Your division,
with such troops as are now at Forts Montgomery, Independence and Constitution,
are to be under your command, and remain in this quarter, for the security of
the above posts, and the passes through the Highlands, from this place, and the
one on the west side of Hudson's River. Unnecessary it is for me to say any
thing to evince the importance of securing the land and water communication
through these passes, or to prove the indispensable necessity of using every
exertion in your power, to have such works erected for the defense of them, as
your own judgment, assisted by that of your Brigadiers and Engineer, may show
the expediency of. You will not only keep in view the importance of securing
these passes, but the necessity of doing it without delay: not only from the
probability of the enemy's attempting to seize them, but from the advanced
season, which will not admit of any spade-work, after the frost (which may
daily be expected) sets in.

Lose not a moment, therefore, in choosing the grounds on the east and west
side of the river, on which your intended works are to be erected. Let your men
designed for each post be speedily allotted,

etc. --

After instructions so positive and pressing, you will readily agree that it
would be very improper, in me, to order any of the troops from posts, to which
they are so expressly assigned, and from business which in his Excellency's
view is so very important. Add to this, their present disposition is such, that
to collect any thing near the number you mention, would occasion as great
delay, and cause many of them to march nearly as far, as if sent immediately
from your quarter.

I am, dear General, with esteem, Yours respectfully, (Signed) W. HEATH.

Genesis LEE.

This did not seem to satisfy Genesis Lee, who wrote our General the following:

CAMP, Nov. 23d, 1776. SIR,
BY your mode of reasoning, the General's instructions are so binding, that not
a tittle must be broke through, for the salvation of the General and the army.
I have ordered Glover's brigade to march up toward Peek's Kill, to put the
passage of the Highlands out of danger; but I intend to take 2,000 from your
division with me into the Jersies; so I must desire that you will have that
number in readiness by the day after tomorrow, when I shall be with you early
in the forenoon;

And am, Sir, Your most obedient servant, (Signed) CHARLES LEE.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

To which our General returned the following answer:

PEEK'S KILL, Nov. 24th, 1776. SIR,
BE my mode of reasoning as it may, I conceive it to be my duty to obey my
instructions, especially those which are positive and poignant, and that to
deviate from them even in extreme cases, would be an error; though perhaps an
error on the right side.

I can assure you, Sir, that I have the salvation of the General and army so
much at heart, that the least recommendation from him, to march my division, or
any part of them, over the river, should have been instantly obeyed, without
waiting for a positive order.

My conduct must be approved or censured, as I adhere to, or depart from, my
orders; and, as it is my duty, I shall strictly abide by them, until they are
countermanded in such manner, as will justify a deviation from them, to him who
instructed me, and to the world.

I shall be happy in being honored with your company tomorrow;

And am, with respect and esteem, Your obedient humble servant, (Signed) W.
HEATH.

Genesis LEE.

After the foregoing was sent off, our General reflected for a moment, that as
circumstances alter cases, Genesis Washington being now pressed, and the army with
him but feeble, he might possibly wish for some aid from his division. He
therefore sat down and wrote him a short letter, stating in what manner he had
disposed of the troops under his command, and wishing to know his pleasure
whether any part of them should join him; enclosing copies of the letters he
had received from Genesis Lee, and of his answers. The express was directed to
make the utmost dispatch out and returning, which he effected on the 26th,
(several days before Genesis Lee got up to Peek's Kill) bringing with him the
following letter from Secretary Harrison.

NEWARK, Nov. 25th, 1776. DEAR GENERAL,
I AM directed by his Excellency to acknowledge his receipt of your letter of
yesterday, and to inform you, the disposition of the troops, mentioned in your
former letter, has his approbation.

In respect to the troops intended to come to this quarter, his Excellency
never meant that they should be from your division. He has wrote Genesis Lee,
since, so fully and explicitly upon the subject, that any misapprehensions he
may have been under at first, must be now done away. He will most probably have
reached Peek's Kill before now, with his division, and be pushing to join us.
No new event has taken place.

I am, Sir, very respectfully, Your most obedient servant, (Signed) R. H.
HARRISON.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

21st. -- A heavy cannonade was heard toward Amboy.

22d. -- Col. Tupper, who was down near Tappan, got up to King's Ferry. He
brought off the two 12 pounders which were at Dobb's Ferry, and a quantity of
provisions. The same evening, our General ordered the Washington Galley to take
station at King's Ferry.

24th. -- Our General gave orders for Clinton's and Scott's brigades to hold
themselves in readiness to march to the Jersey side.

25th. -- Scott's brigade was ordered over to Haverstraw, and Col. Tyler's
regiment, then at Ramapaugh River, to march down to Tappan, to secure and bring
off the provisions which were at that place.

27th. -- Capt Treadwell, of the artillery, with a three-pounder, was ordered
to move over the river, and join Genesis Scott's brigade. It was learnt that many
of the inhabitants of New Jersey, especially in the neighborhood of
Hackensack, were swearing allegiance to King George, taking letters of
protection, etc.

28th. -- Mr. Livingston came from Congress, to advise with our General on
measures to obstruct the river. The same day, Capt. Harrod brought off from
Tappan, a considerable quantity of pearl-ash, beeswax, oil, etc.

29th. -- Two of the regiments of Genesis Clinton's brigade were ordered to move
to Fort Constitution, in order to attempt the forming of obstructions in the
river near Polipins Island.

30th. -- Just before dinner, Genesis Sullivan arrived at our General's quarters;
and in the afternoon Genesis Lee arrived. He called at the door; when our General
waiting upon him, requested him to alight, he asked if he could have a cup of
tea, and was answered that he should have a good one. Upon coming into the
house, before he sat down, he wished to speak in private, which being instantly
granted, he told our General that, in a military view, or, to use his own words
exactly, "In point of law, you are right; but in point of policy, I think you
are wrong. I am going into the Jersies for the salvation of America; I wish to
take with me a larger force than I now have, and request you to order 2,000 of
your men to march with me." Our General answered, that he could not spare that
number. He was then asked to order 1,000; to which he replied, that the
business might be as well brought to a point at once -- that not a single man
should march from the post by his order. Genesis Lee replied, that he would then
order them himself. He was answered, that there was a wide difference between
the two; that Genesis Lee was acknowledged by our General to be his senior; but,
as he had received positive written instructions from him who was superior to
both, he would not himself break those orders: If Genesis Lee was disposed to
counteract them, its being done by him could not be imputed to any other
person; and that he knew the Commander in Chief did not intend any of the
troops should be removed from that post -- having expressed it not only in his
instructions, but also in a letter just received from him. On the letter being
shown to Genesis Lee, he observed, "The Commander in Chief is now at a distance,
and does not know what is necessary here so well as I do" -- asked if he might
be favored with the return-book of the division. Major Huntington, the Deputy
Adjutant-General, was directed to hand it. Genesis Lee ran his eye over it, and
said, "I will take Prescott's and Wyllis's regiments" -- and turning to Major
Huntington, said, "You will order those two regiments to march early tomorrow
morning to join me." Our General, turning to the Major, said, "Issue such
orders at your peril!" and then turning to Genesis Lee, addressed him: "Sir, if
you come to this post, and mean to issue orders here, which will break those
positive ones which I have received, I pray you to do it completely yourself,
and through your own Deputy Adjutant-General, who is present, and not draw me,
or any of my family, in as partners in the guilt." Genesis Lee replied, "It is
right. Col. Scammel, do you issue the order;" which he did, and Huntington
communicated it to the regiments, who were now posted at the Gorge of the
mountains, near Robinson's Bridge, afterward called the Continental Village.
Matters carried thus far, our General turned to Genesis Lee again: "Sir, I have
one more request to make, and that is, that you will be pleased to give me a
certificate, that you exercise command at this post, and do order from it
Prescott's and Wyllis's regiments." Lee replied, "I do not know that I will
comply with your request." Genesis Clinton, who was present, observed, "Genesis Lee,
you cannot refuse a request so reasonable." Upon which Genesis Lee wrote as
follows:

PEEK'S KILL, Dec. 1st, 1776.
FOR the satisfaction of Genesis Heath, and at his request, I do certify, that I
am commanding officer, at this present writing, in this post, and that I have,
in that capacity, ordered Prescott's and Wyllis's regiments to march.

(Signed) CHARLES LEE, Maj. Genesis


Genesis Lee, stepping out on the piazza, observed to an officer, "Genesis Heath is
right." Early the next morning, the regiments moved from their cantonment
toward Peek's Kill; but before they had reached it, Genesis Lee, now ready to
pass into the Jersies, rode up to our General's door, and calling him,
observed, "Upon further consideration, I have concluded not to take the two
regiments with me -- you may order them to return to their former post." This
conduct of Genesis Lee's appeared not a little extraordinary, and one is almost at
a loss to account for it. He had been a soldier from his youth, had a perfect
knowledge of service in all its branches, but was rather obstinate in his
temper, and could scarcely brook being crossed in any thing in the line of his
profession. Genesis Lee took with him into the Jersies some as good troops as any
in the service; but many of them were so destitute of shoes, that the blood
left on the rugged frozen ground, in many places, marked the route they had
taken; and a considerable number, unable to march, were left at Peek's Kill.
The time of service for which Genesis Scott's brigade was engaged to serve,
expired, when the whole, except about 50, went home, notwithstanding the
generous encouragement offered them by their State, (New York) if they would
continue one month longer.

2d and 3d: -- Genesis Lee's troops were passing the ferry. Genesis Carleton having
returned into Canada, a number of Genesis Gates's regiments were now moving to
reinforce Genesis Washington -- their van as far as Morristown -- the enemy as far
as Brunswick.

6th. -- Intelligence was received, that on the 4th, about sunset, 70 sail of
ships of war and transports, passed in the sound toward New England. Our
General immediately sent off expresses to Genesis Washington, Gov. Trumbull, Mr.
Bowdoin, at Boston, the Convention of New York, etc.

7th: -- Three regiments, viz. Greaton's, Bond's, and Porter's, arrived off the
landing from Albany, on their way to Genesis Washington. Matters now looked
serious in Jersey. The British were extending themselves in all directions, and
the inhabitants obliged to become passive, if not worse. Genesis Gates had ordered
the troops, moving from the northward, to rendezvous at Goshen.

8th. -- Our General wrote Genesis Lee, that the troops were moving on from the
northward, and as Genesis Gates had not yet overtaken them, some of the
commanding-officers appeared to wish for orders how to proceed. Genesis
Washington, it was said, was as far as Trenton -- Lee, the preceding night, as
far as Pompton. A flag schooner came up from New York, to obtain leave for some
families to go in. A Parson Inglish was on board. Orders were given to treat
the flag with politeness, and at the same time with proper precaution; and the
business was laid before the Convention of the State.

The same day, Genesis Clinton, with two British and two Hessian brigades, with a
squadron of ships under the command of Sir Peter Parker, took possession of
Rhode Island; without the loss of a man; the Americans quitting the island
without making any opposition. Rhode Island was a great acquisition to the
British, for quarters, forage, and a safe harbor; but lessened their ability
for other more important operations in the field.

On the evening of the 9th, our General received orders from the Commander in
Chief, to move over the Hudson, with Parsons's brigade, and to move on so as to
give protection to the country, and vigor to the cause in Jersey.

10th. -- A little after noon, Parsons's brigade marched down to King's Ferry;
the greatest alertness having been discovered by both officers and men on the
occasion.

11th. -- About eleven o'clock, A. M. our General left Peek's Kill, and
proceeded for the Jersies; on crossing King's Ferry, gave orders for the flag
to be detained from returning until further orders. The troops crossed the
ferry, and marched as far as Col. Hays' at Haverstraw. Huntington's and Tyler's
regiments were ordered to advance from Ramapaugh Bridge to Paramus. Our General
received a letter from Genesis Lee, in answer to the one he wrote on the 8th from
Peek's Kill, as follows:

CHATHAM, Dec. 9th, 1776. DEAR GENERAL,
I AM very much obliged to you for your welcome tidings; and have only to beg,
that you will direct the regiments you speak of, to march without loss of time
to Morristown. I sent an express to you last night, from the General, ordering
your division over the river, which I confess, for my own part, I am heartily
sorry for; as I think we shall be strong enough without you, and New England,
with your district, will be too bare of troops. I am in hopes here to
re-conquer (if I may so express myself) the Jersies. It was really in the hands
of the enemy before my arrival.

Adieu, dear Sir, (Signed) CHARLES LEE.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

The foregoing letter appears very different from the former ones.

12th. -- Early in the morning, the troops took up their line of march from
Haverstraw, and before sunset reached Tappan.

13th. -- Sent out a reconnoitring party toward Hackensack, to get
intelligence, etc. This day, Genesis Lee was taken prisoner, near Chatham, by a
party of light horse, commanded by Col. Harcourt. Lee took quarters at a small
distance from his troops: an inhabitant gave notice of it to Col. Harcourt, who
was out reconnoitring near that neighborhood, and who had the address to take
and carry him off.

14th. -- Our General held up every appearance of moving to Paramus, and sent
off his baggage under escort to that place; and between 11 and 12 o'clock,
marched briskly for Hackensack, having sent orders for Huntington's and Tyler's
regiments to move from Paramus at the same time. Buskirk's regiment was at
Hackensack Bridge the preceding day, where they did duty, and it was expected
they were still at the same place. To surprise and take them was the object;
but it was found that Buskirk's men had moved the preceding day to Bergen, in
order to draw new arms. The town was completely surprised, not having an idea
that any but British troops were near them. One British soldier and 20 or 30 of
their adherents, were taken, a number of arms, etc. and at the wharf, several
vessels loaded with hay, etc. on the point of sailing for New York. A brig had
come to sail in the morning, and run some distance down the river, and came to
anchor. An officer with a party was sent down to take her, and bring her up;
but the wind was so strong ahead that it could not be effected. The officer
was then directed to destroy the vessel, as she had a large quantity of forage
on board, destined for New York; but it was said, there were some valuable
articles on board, which might be taken out and brought up in the boats. The
orders were varied accordingly, with directions, that in case the enemy
advanced before the business was completed, to set the brig on fire. The boats
brought up one load; but on returning to the brig, they discovered a body of
the enemy advancing, when the brig was abandoned without being set on fire. The
enemy immediately took possession of her. Among the articles taken out, was a
large chest of plate. This was conveyed to Peek's Kill, and delivered to the
Deputy Quarter-Master-General; and when the British afterward destroyed the
public stores at that place, the chest of plate was removed by the
Quartermaster into Connecticut; where afterward Genesis Parsons, in behalf of
the officers and soldiers of the division, filed a libel in the Maritime Court,
and the officer who boarded the vessel, filed one in his own behalf. On trial,
the Court adjudged the plate to the latter, although he boarded the vessel in
obedience to express orders. About 100 barrels of flour, which had been
abandoned by the Americans, when they retreated before Lord Cornwallis, were
recovered and sent off; and about 100 arms were also secured, with a quantity
of rum, gin, etc. In the evening, as two or three American officers were
walking along the street, a gentleman, who was an inhabitant, came up to them,
and expressed his joy on the arrival of the troops, (supposing they were
British.) The officers immediately conducted him to our General, and on
entering the room informed him, that they came to introduce a friend who had
joined them in the street, and who was able to give some important information.
Our General expressed a high satisfaction, and wished to know what information
he could give. He replied, that he heard there was a large body of rebels
collecting up above them. He was asked if, in case these rebels should advance,
any assistance could be afforded by the people of the town, and whether they
could be depended on? He answered, there were a considerable number, and that
they might be depended on. He was asked, whether there was not a number in the
town who were in favor of the rebels? He answered, that there was; but that
they had seized and sent off the principal ones among them, and that now the
others dared not show themselves. The joke was thus going on, when Col.
Prescott, who stood near him, holding his hat in his hand, in which there was a
red cockade, (at that time a mark of the distinction of rank) the gentleman
fixed his eye upon it, and his countenance immediately fell. He was then told,
that those whom he termed rebels were now in possession of the place, and had
now received his information. He was ordered into custody.

15th. -- All the wagons in the vicinity were collected, and the flour and
other stores moved off to Paramus. Reconnoitring parties were sent out to a
distance, to observe the motions of the enemy.

16th. -- The effects were generally removed, and about noon the reconnoitring
parties reported, that the enemy were advancing on both sides of the place.
They were soon after discovered by the guard at Acquackanuck Bridge. A little
before sunset, the troops left the town. A strong rear-guard was ordered to
remain on the high ground back of the town, until after dark, to light up a
number of fires, and then to move on after the troops. Just before the division
left the town, Genesis George Clinton, attended by some light horse, joined the
division.

17th. -- Reconnoitring parties were sent out on all the roads.

18th. -- Intelligence was received, that some of the Jersey militia had had a
skirmish with a body of British troops under Genesis Leslie, near Springfield.
Both parties retired. Of the militia, several were killed and wounded.

The Convention of New York, greatly alarmed at the removal of our General with
the continental troops, from the important passes of the Highlands, sent a
request to Genesis Washington, desiring that they might be ordered back again. To
insure dispatch, they offered the express extra pay. The Commander in Chief was
pleased to grant their request, and ordered our General to return to Peek's
Kill, and re-occupy his former positions.

Our General, having received certain information that Buskirk's regiment was
at or near Bergen Woods, it was determined to strike them. For this purpose, on
the evening of the 19th, about 8 o'clock, Genesis Parsons, with 250 continental
troops, and Genesis Clinton, with a like number of the militia of New York,
marched from Paramus church, and a covering party of 300 men was ordered to
Tappan.

About 1 o'clock, the next morning, the detachment reached Bergen, and
completely surprised the enemy's guard, making 22 men prisoners. The regiment
was alarmed, and a pretty brisk skirmish ensued. The enemy were collecting, and
it was judged best for the detachment to come off, having been so far
victorious.

20th. -- About 1 o'clock, P. M. the detachment returned to Paramus, having, in
the short interval of time, marched (out and returning) upwards of 40 miles.
They brought back with them, besides their prisoners, 16 new firelocks, 6
horses, and one wagon; having sustained the loss of one man. The enemy were
supposed to have had several killed.

21st. -- Orders were given for the troops to be ready to march early the next
morning. The gentleman who was taken into custody at Hackensack, chagrined
almost to death, had been spending his time, like April, in weeping and
lowering; and much intercession having been made for his release, our General
told him, that in case he would faithfully perform a piece of secret service
allotted to him, he should be released. This he performed with punctuality, and
consequently was set at liberty.

22d. -- The troops marched from Paramus round by the side of Kakaat, to
Clark's-Town, which they reached about sunset.

23d. -- The troops took up their line of march, crossed the Hudson, and
arrived at Peek's Kill.

24th. -- Gave permission for the flag to return to New York, having on board
the families of Mr. Inglish, Moore, etc.

25th. -- It was learnt that a body of Hessian troops had not long before moved
to the upper end of York Island. The militia of the State of New York were this
day beginning to come in.

26th. -- A severe snow-storm. Some of the militia from Massachusetts had
reached Danbury.

29th. -- Intelligence was received from Providence, that a most valuable
prize, taken by the ship Alfred, had arrived safe at Bedford, in Massachusetts.

30th. -- Col. Chester, of Connecticut, arrived at Peek's Kill, from Genesis
Washington's camp, with the agreeable news, that on the preceding Thursday
morning, being the 26th, Genesis Washington, at the head of about 3,000 men,
crossed the Delaware, and attacked the enemy at Trenton, being about 1,600
Hessians; and in about 35 minutes entirely defeated them. One Colonel, 2
Lieutenant-Colonels, 3 Majors, 4 Captains, 8 Lieutenants, 12 Ensigns, 1 Judge
Advocate, 2 Surgeon's Mates, 92 Sergeants, 20 Drummers, 9 Musicians, 25
Officers' servants, and 740 rank and file were taken prisoners, besides the
killed and wounded. Six pieces of brass cannon, 12 drums, 4 standards, 1200
small-arms, 6 wagons, a number of swords, caps, etc. were the trophies of
victory. The same day, Colonel Sparhawk's regiment of militia arrived from
Massachusetts.

31st. -- Information was given, that a company of 60 disaffected inhabitants
were on their way to join the enemy. Parties were sent out to intercept them.

1777. January 1st. -- By a letter from General Washington, it appeared that
the enemy were retreating toward Amboy. Generals Mifflin and Erving, and Col.
Cadwallader had crossed the Delaware, and Genesis Washington was about to follow
them, and pursue the enemy.

2d. -- Several infamous disaffected persons were taken and sent in. The same
day, Genesis Washington being at Trenton, Genesis How advanced to attack him; a
cannonade ensued: Genesis Washington retired to the other side of the Mill Creek;
and, as soon as it was dark, ordering a great number of fires to be lighted up,
to deceive the enemy, stole a march, and at 9 o'clock next morning attacked
three regiments of the enemy, who were posted at Princetown, routed them,
driving them from two small redoubts. The enemy lost, in killed, wounded and
taken prisoners about 500. The American loss was inconsiderable, except in the
brave Genesis Mercer, of Virginia, who fell in this action, greatly regretted. In
this maneuver and action Genesis Washington exhibited the most consummate
generalship, and the British were struck with consternation. Ambuscade,
surprise and stratagem are said to constitute the sublime part of the art of
war, and that he who possesses the greatest resource in these, will eventually
pluck the laurel from the brow of his opponent. The stratagems of war are
almost infinite, but all have the same object, namely, to deceive -- to hold up
an appearance of something which is not intended, while under this mask some
important object is secured; and be a General never so brave, if he be
unskilled in the arts and stratagems of war, he is really to be pitied; for his
bravery will but serve to lead him into those wily snares which are laid for
him.

3d. -- Thirty-seven recruits going to Rogers, taken the preceding night, were
brought in; and our General ordered out Capt. Graham at 12 o'clock at night, to
intercept another gang.

4th. -- Genesis Lincoln arrived from Massachusetts; he had come on with a body of
militia.

5th. -- It was learnt that on the 1st inst. Genesis Putnam took a large quantity
of baggage, provisions, etc. at Bordentown; and on the 3d, Genesis Washington's
army came up with the rear of the enemy, at or near Rocky Hill, when a brisk
action ensued, and the enemy were defeated, with the loss of between 50 and 60
killed, and upwards of 100 taken prisoners, together with 6 pieces of cannon,
and all their baggage: the Americans had 6 men killed. The same day, Col.
Sparhawk's regiment of militia, from Massachusetts, with two fieldpieces,
marched for King's Ferry, on their way to the Jersies.

7th. -- Our General received the following letter from Genesis Washington:

PLUCKEMIN, Jan. 5th, 1777. SIR,
WE have made a successful attack upon Princeton. General How advanced upon
Trenton; we evacuated the town, and lay at the other side of the Mill Creek
until dark; then stole a march, and attacked Princeton about 9 o'clock in the
morning. There were three regiments quartered there. The killed, wounded, and
prisoners taken, amounted to about 500. The enemy are in great consternation;
and as the present affords us a favorable opportunity to drive them out of the
Jersies, it has been determined in Council, that you should move down toward
New York with a considerable force, as if you had a design upon the city; that
being an object of great importance, the enemy will be reduced to the necessity
of withdrawing a considerable part of their force from the Jersies, if not the
whole, to secure the city. I shall draw the force on this side the North River
together at Morristown, where I shall watch the motions of the enemy, and avail
myself of every circumstance. You will retain 4,000 of the militia, coming on
from the New England Governments for the expedition. You will act with great
precaution, but avail yourself of every favorable opportunity of attacking the
enemy, when you can do it to advantage.

Genesis Lincoln must cross the North River, and come on with the remainder of the
militia to Morristown. Leave a sufficient guard at the Highlands.

You will also have as many boats collected together, or in such a manner as
you may always avail yourself of them, if it should be found expedient for your
troops or any part of them to cross the North River, at Dobb's Ferry, or any
other of the landings.

I am, etc. (Signed) GEO. WASHINGTON.

Genesis HEATH.

Preparations for the before mentioned movement were immediately put in train.
The militia and volunteers were coming in.

8th. -- Genesis Parsons went down to King Street.

9th. -- The remainder of Col. Sparhawk's and Col. Whitney's regiments passed
over the river, to join Genesis Washington.

10th. -- Col. Frost's regiment marched to North-Castle, and Genesis Scott's
militia to White Plains.

11th. -- A number of British officers, taken at Princeton, passed Peek's Kill,
on their way to Connecticut. The same day it was learnt, that on the 8th, Genesis
Maxwell, with the Jersey militia, and some continental troops, routed the enemy
at Elizabeth-Town, where he took 50 Highlanders, a schooner loaded with
baggage, and fell in with a party of 30 Waldeckers, whom he also took prisoners.

12th. -- Genesis Moulton from Massachusetts, and Col. Gilman from New Hampshire,
came to camp. A number of British prisoners, taken in the Jersies, passed
Peek's Kill, on their way to Connecticut.

13th. -- Our General moved to the southward, and reached North-Castle just
before sunset, where he found part of four regiments had arrived, and Genesis
Scott's militia of New York had moved down to Wright's Mills.

14th. -- Our General moved to King Street to Mr. Clap's -- about 3,000 militia
had arrived, and Genesis Lincoln's division marched to Tarrytown on this day. The
Commander in Chief in another letter had intimated that Genesis Lincoln, instead
of moving on to join him, should stay on the east side of the Hudson, and join
in the expedition.

15th. -- The Connecticut volunteers marched from King Street to New Rochelle,
and Genesis Scott's brigade to Stephen Ward's. Plenty of provisions were arriving.
A deserter came in from the enemy, and gave an account of their situation and
numbers.

17th. -- At night the three divisions began to move toward Kingsbridge; Gen
Lincoln's, from Tarrytown, on the Albany road; Generals Wooster and Parsons's,
from New Rochelle and East-Chester, and Genesis Scott's in the center from below
White Plains. The several distances and rate of marching were so we calculated,
that, on the 18th, just before sunrise, the three divisions, although so far
apart, arrived at the out-posts of the enemy almost at the same instant. Genesis
Lincoln's on the heights above Col. Van Cortland's; Wooster's at Williams's;
and Scott's on the back of Volentine's. Our General, who moved with the center
division, knew that Volentine's house was the quarters of one of the guards; he
did not know but it might be defended: as he approached it, he ordered Capt.
Lieut. Bryant to advance a field-piece to the advance-guard, and if there was
any opposition from the house, to cannonade it immediately. He then ordered 250
men from the head of the column (as it was moving on) to incline to the right,
and by a double step to push into the hollow, between the house and the fort,
to cut off the guard who were at the house, in case they should run toward the
latter. At this instant, two light-horsemen who had been sent out by the enemy
as the day broke to reconnoitre the vicinity, came unexpectedly at the descent
of a hill, plump upon the head of Wooster's column. They attempted to turn
about, but before it could be fully effected, a field-piece was discharged at
them; one of them was pitched from his horse and taken prisoner, the other
galloped back to the fort, holloing as he passed, "The rebels! The rebels!"
This set all the outguards and pickets running to the fort, leaving in some
places their arms, blankets, tools, provisions, etc. behind them. Those who
fled from Volentine's, and the Negro Fort, were fired at as they ran, but none
were killed: one, who could not run so fast as the rest, was taken prisoner.
Ten muskets were taken at Volentine's house. The guard above Van Cortland's
was as completely surprised as the others, where Genesis Lincoln took about 40
arms, some blankets, etc. etc. The left and center divisions moved into the
hollow, between Volentine's house and the fort, from whence our General
immediately sent a summons to the commanding-officer of the fort to surrender.
The Commandant of the fort, and a considerable part of the garrison, being
Hessians, the summons held out to these generous terms. The answer, which was
verbal, was a refusal to surrender. A detachment with two fieldpieces was
ordered to move to the south of the fort, to a hill above Haarlem Creek, not
far from the New Bridge. When the detachment arrived at this place, a battalion
of Hessians appeared drawn up on the side of the hill just within Kingsbridge,
and back of Hyatt's tavern. Our General ordered the artillery to cannonade them
immediately. The first shot just cleared the right of the battalion, nearly a
platoon settling down as the shot passed them, which entered the bank close
behind them. The second shot passed about the center of the battalion, when to
the amount of a grand division settled down, which was an evidence that they
would not stand much longer. One of the pieces was ordered to be drawn lower
down the hill; on which the battalion quitted their ground, and marched off as
fast as they could without running, to get behind the redoubt and hill at the
bridge, receiving one shot more as they were turning round the point. It was
not suspected that the enemy had any cannon in the redoubt within the bridge,
but they now began to cannonade the artillery-men who had descended the hill,
who had to draw up their piece as fast as possible, which they effected without
any loss, but received three or four shot quite among them, before they could
reach the top of the hill.

This success at the out-posts flew through the country, and was soon magnified
to a reduction of the fort, and capture of the garrison. It reached Genesis
Washington long before the official account, and he had communicated the report
to Congress; hence a double disappointment, when the true state of facts was
received.

19th. -- The enemy cannonaded from the fort, and killed one American, as the
guards were relieving at the Negro Fort. It was determined to make an attempt
to cut off the battalion within Kingsbridge, early the next morning, by passing
a strong detachment over Spitten-Devil Creek on the ice, which, however, was
not now very strong, but the weather was cold. One thousand were detached for
the purpose; but the weather having grown warm in the night, the ice was
judged, by the unanimous opinion of all the General Officers on the ground, to
be too hazardous on the morning of the 20th to venture the attempt. On this day
there was a cannonade on both sides, and the enemy on the island side were
thrown into much confusion. Our General observing that when the enemy within
the island were cannonaded across Haarlem Creek, they sheltered themselves
behind the little hill near the bridge, next to Spitten-Devil Creek, on this
afternoon he rode round on to Tippit's Hill, which was in its rear, and found
that a field-piece drawn up on that side would leave the enemy no hiding place.

21st. -- A cannonade on both sides. In the afternoon a field-piece was hauled
up to Tippit's Hill, and the enemy were cannonaded both in front and rear: they
were thrown into the utmost confusion: some secured themselves in their
redoubt, others under the banks: some lay flat on the ground, and some betook
themselves to the cellars; so that in a short time there was no object for the
gunners. The weather had now grown very moderate.

22d. -- There was a pretty smart skirmish with the enemy near the fort. This
day our General ordered a number of chandeliers, fascines, etc. to be made; and
having nothing but light fieldpieces with him, in order to keep up an
appearance of a serious design on the fort, he sent to North-Castle, where was
a field brass 24-pounder and some howitzers, to bring forward the former and
one of the latter.

23d. -- A smart skirmish took place just before dusk, in the broken ground
near the south side of the fort; an Ensign and one man belonging to the
New York militia were killed, and five wounded; the loss of the enemy unknown,
as it was close under the fort.

24th. -- Excessive stormy. Genesis Lincoln's division, who were in huts in the
woods, back of Col. Van Cortland's, were obliged to quit their ground, and move
back into houses where they could find them; some of them as far as Dobb's
Ferry; with the loss of a great many cartridges, from the badness of the boxes.
The fall of rain was so great as to cause a great fresh in the Brunx, the water
running over the bridge by Williams's.

25th. -- Early in the morning, the enemy made a sally toward Delaney's Mills,
where they surprised and routed the guard, wounding several, but not killing or
taking any of them; and a regiment near that place quitted their quarters.
Emboldened by this success, about 10 o'clock, A. M. they made a powerful sally
toward Volentine's, instantly driving the guards and pickets from the Negro
Fort and Volentine's house; pushing on with great impetuosity, keeping up a
brisk fire, the balls passing at Williams's house sufficiently strong to do
execution. The retreating guards threw themselves into the old redoubt on the
north side of the road, to the west of the bridge; on which, the enemy
immediately lined a strong stone wall, a few rods distant to the southwest. Two
regiments of the militia being at this instant formed in the road near
Williams's, and the horses in the limbers of the fieldpieces, our General
ordered Capt. Bryant to ford over the bridge with his piece, and the militia to
follow and cover the artillery. When Capt. Bryant had ascended almost to the
top of the hill, to prevent his horses being shot, he unlimbered, and the men
took the drag-ropes; but the ascent of the hill was such, that they were
obliged to drag the piece almost within pisto-shot, before the ground would
admit the plece to be so depressed as to bear on the enemy. The moment this was
effected, a round shot opened a breach in the wall, four or five feet wide; a
second shot in less than a minute opened another, when the enemy sled back to
the fort with the greatest precipitation. Of the Americans, two were killed and
a number wounded.

27th. -- The brass 24-pounder and howitzer were brought up, and ordered to
open upon the fort; on the third discharge of the former, she sprang her
carriage; nor were there any live shells for the howitzer, there being none at
North-Castle; nor was a regular cannonade or bombardment of the fort ever
contemplated. Every attempt was now made, by feint and otherwise, to draw the
enemy out of the fort. A detachment was sent down to Morrisania, to light up a
great number of fires in the night, to induce the enemy to suppose that a body
of Americans were collecting at that place, with a design to cross on to
New York Island, at or near Haarlem; and to heighten this, several large boats
were sent for, and brought forward on carriages. The British guard on
Montresor's Island were so much alarmed at this, as to set the buildings on
fire, and flee to New York. A brigade of the British were said to have moved
toward Fort Washington; and orders had been sent to Rhode Island, for a
detachment to be sent from thence.

29th. -- There was the appearance of a severe snow-storm coming on, when all
the General Officers on the ground, viz. besides our General, Lincoln, Wooster,
Scott and Ten Broeck, were unanimously of opinion that the troops ought to move
back before the storm came on, to places where they could be covered from the
inclemency of the weather, as there was no artillery to batter the fort, and
from first to last they were unanimously opposed to any idea of an assault or
storm of the sort with the militia, and the principal object being now to
secure and bring off or destroy the forage, which could be as well done where
the troops could have covering, as to harass them in the open fields by
multiplying guards, or their being constantly exposed in the scattered houses
to be surprised and cut off. For these several reasons, the troops were ordered
as soon as it grew dark to move back, Genesis Lincoln's division to Dobb's Ferry
and Tarry-Town, Genesis Wooster's to New Rochelle, and Genesis Scott's to White
Plains; the guards to remain at their posts and alert, until the troops were
all moved off, and then to form rear guards on the several roads, following the
troops to whom they respectively belonged; all of which was performed in good
order, in a very heavy fall of snow.

30th. -- The storm cleared up, when 15 ships, 1 brig, 2 schooners, and 2
sloops came too, between Heart and City Islands; they were from the eastward,
and were supposed to have troops on board. The troops on this expedition, as it
was called, were in a very hazardous situation, and had continued in it from
the morning of the 18th to the evening of the 29th; they were entirely a body
of militia, except a few artillery-men. So apprehensive of this being a
critical situation was the Commander in Chief, in the year 1780, when Genesis Sir
Henry Clinton menaced the French army at Rhode Island, and had embarked his
troops on board transports for the purpose of proceeding to that place, and
Genesis Washington had determined to move down toward Kingsbridge, to induce Sir
Henry to give up his design by menacing New York, our General being then at
Rhode Island with the French army, Genesis Washington wrote him on the 31st of
July from Robinson's House in the Highlands -- among other things, "You know
the critical situation in which this army will be in a position below." This
was undoubtedly a very just observation; but if the Commander in Chief, with
the whole American army in 1780, well armed and highly disciplined, should so
justly judge at the distance of 30 miles from the spot, what shall we say of
those brave militia men, who continued in the position itself, for more than
ten days in the midst of winter.

Whenever an enterprise is to be attempted in the teeth of an enemy, it should
be a dash and away.

31st. -- A cordon of troops was ordered to be formed, to extend from Dobb's
Ferry to Maroneck.

February 1st. -- Foraging being now the object, a large number of teams were
sent out toward Maroneck, and upwards of 80 loads of forage were brought off.
Twelve more ships, 4 of which were of 40 guns, came down the Sound the
preceding day.

2d. -- Col. Humphries, of New York, arrived with a regiment of militia from
Albany county, to continue in service six weeks.

3d. -- There was another grand forage.

6th. -- A strong detachment under the command of Col. Enos was sent toward
Fort Independence, to attempt to surprise some of the enemy's out-posts, but
nothing could be effected. The smallpox was now making its appearance in the
neighborhood.

8th. -- There was a grand forage to the lower parts of West-Chester county. A
row-galley and a sloop were coming up the North River. The covering party to
the foragers on this day was nearly 1,000 strong, and large quantities of
forage were brought off.

10th. -- Our General rode to Peek's Kill, where he arrived a little after
dark. Genesis Lincoln's troops were on their march to join Genesis Washington. Our
General had obtained leave of the Commander in Chief, to make a short visit to
New England, under an injunction to return very early.

12th. -- About 10 o'clock, he left Peck's Kill, and arrived at his house in
Roxbury on the 19th, about sunset.

March 14th. -- Our General set out from Roxbury, on his way back to the army;
but before he had got to Watertown, an express overtook him, with orders from
Genesis Washington, for him to take the command of the Eastern Department; Genesis
Ward having applied for leave to resign the command, meaning to retire from the
service: he therefore turned back, and rode into Boston.

This year, 1777, formed an important era in the annals of America. Congress
had determined to make great exertions to drive the British troops from
America; for this purpose, they had ordered 88 battalions to be raised in the
United States, 15 of which fell to the share of Massachusetts. Besides the
foregoing 88 battalions, they also ordered the raising of 16 others, called the
additional battalions; and of these, three were raising in Massachusetts, viz.
Jackson's, Lee's and Henley's; besides Armand's Legion, Artificers, etc. The
arming, equipping and sending on the recruits -- furnishing the Recruiting
Officers with bounty moneys -- and the forwarding on immense quantities of all
kinds of military stores, (for Massachusetts might now be called the great
magazine of military stores of the Union, partly on account of her own
resources, managed by the indefatigable industry of her Board of War) -- and
the arrivals of public stores here and at Portsmouth, called for the utmost
diligence and exertion of the commanding General. The Commander in Chief had
given directions for the troops to be forwarded on, with all possible dispatch,
to Ticonderoga.

20th. -- Maj. Genesis Ward resigned the command of the Eastern Department to our
General, who took the command accordingly.

23d. -- A detachment of British troops, consisting as was said of about 500
men, destroyed the American stores at Peek's Kill; they met with but very
little opposition: here our General lost a part of his baggage, which was left
when he came away for Boston, in February. Monsieur De Bore, a French General,
came to Boston: he had been engaged by our Ministers in France, to enter the
American service, etc.

27th. -- Our General received orders from the Commander in Chief, to make an
alteration in the destination of the Massachusetts regiments, sending eight of
the regiments to Peek's Kill, and seven to Ticonderoga.

31st. -- Our General took a view of the state of the works at Dorchester, etc.

April 3d. -- Capt. Sumner, of Greaton's regiment, marched a detachment of the
regiment for Peek's Kill.

4th. -- A part of Col. Shepard's regiment marched for Peek's Kill.

7th. -- Our General took a view of the barracks at Prospect Hill, preparatory
to the putting of the recruits under inoculation with the smallpox.

9th. -- About 120 men of Patterson's regiment marched for Peek's Kill.

11th. -- A part of Nixon's regiment marched for Peek's Kill; on the 12th, 160
men of Bayley's for Ticonderoga; and on the 13th, 200 of Wesson's for the
latter place. The same day, began to inoculate the recruits at Prospect Hill.

15th. -- Colonel Jackson's Independent Company marched to do duty at
Providence; and a company of Col. Crane's artillery for the main army.

16th. -- Two hundred men of Col. Wigglesworth's regiment marched for Peek's
Kill. The same evening, our General received orders from Genesis Washington to
send the troops to Peek's Kill, by the route of Kenderhook. The same day, 10
tons of powder arrived at Boston, from Portsmouth, (N. H.)

A second division of recruits for Bayley's regiment marched for Ticonderoga,
as did a division from Col. Bradford's for the same place.

20th. -- A large letter-of-marque ship arrived at Boston from Nantz in France,
with a valuable cargo on private account.

23d. -- An express from Portsmouth brought an account of the arrival at that
place of the French ship Amphitrite, having on board 52 brass fieldpieces,
completely mounted, with apparatus; 6, 132 muskets; 120 barrels of powder, and
many other articles.

24th. -- A second division of Col. Crane's artillery marched for the army.

28th. -- A division for Wesson's regiment marched for Ticonderoga.

29th. -- An express arrived from Gov. Trumbull, giving an account that the
enemy had landed a body of men near Fairfield, and that a number of ships were
standing up Hudson's River. This body of the enemy consisted of about 2,000;
they landed on the 25th at Fairfield, and pushed for Danbury, where the
Americans had magazines of stores, which the British burnt and destroyed.
Generals Wooster and Arnold were in that part of Connecticut; they assembled
the militia of the vicinity, and attacked the British on their return; and
there were several very sharp skirmishes, at and near Ridgfield, in one of
which the brave Genesis Wooster fell; and Genesis Arnold having his horse shot down
under him, by a soldier who was very near him, and who was following up his
shot with his bayonet charged, Arnold catched one of his pistols from the
holsters on the slain horse, and instantly shot the soldier dead on the spot.
The loss was considerable on both sides, in killed and wounded: the British say
theirs did not exceed 172, killed, wounded and missing. The loss to the
Americans, in stores, etc. was considerable, and could but illy be spared at
that time.

May 5th. -- Col. Jackson's Independent Company returned from doing duty at
Providence.

14th. -- Genesis Du Condray, an experienced French artillery officer, engaged by
our Commissioners in France, to act at the head of the American artillery,
arrived at Boston: on viewing, from Beacon Hill, the situation of Boston, and
the American works around the town, he made a laughed at the British leaving the
town when under no greater danger; adding, that the force which they had, might
have defended the place against an army of 50,000 men. A valuable prize, loaded
with dry goods, was sent into Newbury-Port.

21st. -- The continental frigates, and a fleet of private ships of war, sailed
on a cruize, with a fair wind.

28th. -- Intelligence was received, that a detachment of Americans, under the
command of Colonel Meigs, of Connecticut, had passed the Sound on the 23d to
Long Island, and crossed to Sagg Harbor, where they destroyed and burnt a
number of vessels at the wharf, and every thing on shore, and brought off 80 or
90 prisoners. This enterprise was conducted with much address and great
expedition.

29th. -- A prize brig was sent in, laden with salt, cordage, etc. She was from
Topsham in England. No reinforcement for the army in America had sailed the
last of March.

June 8th. -- Two prizes were sent in; one laden with coals, the other with dry
goods.

9th. -- A 50 gun ship of the enemy, and two frigates were cruizing in our bay.

14th. -- A prize taken by Commodore Manly, laden with duck, cordage, etc. and
two brigs from Bilboa, arrived safe.

July 1st. -- Intelligence was received, that General How evacuated Brunswick
on the 18th of the preceding month; he had before advanced as far as Somerset
courthouse, and had thrown up a number of works, which he abandoned: the
American light troops harassed his rear. This day, four of the enemy's cruizers
came so near in, as to be discovered from Nantasket.

4th. -- The anniversary of the Independence of the United States was
celebrated with proper demonstrations of joy.

6th. -- An express arrived from Peek's Kill, with intelligence from Genesis
Washington, intimating that on the morning of the 1st inst. the enemy's fleet
which lay at Amboy sailed down round that town; and that the troops who lay
encamped opposite to the town, struck their tents and marched off. The enemy
were also advancing on the Lake with their fleet toward Ticonderoga. A
detachment of soldiers for Col. M. Jackson's regiment marched for the northern
army.

7th. -- Capt. Cluston arrived from France, with powder, arms, etc. for the
State; he had also made a successful cruize.

11th. -- Intelligence was received, that the Americans evacuated Ticonderoga
on the 6th, at night; a great many stores, etc. were lost. The British no
sooner arrived before Ticonderoga, than they were discovered on Mount Hope:
this steep and rugged hill was thought to be inaccessible by the Americans, at
least with artillery; and therefore, notwithstanding its nearness to the works,
and overlooking of them in part, it was not taken possession of; but they
should have recollected what had been said by the late King of Prussia, as to
such positions -- that "where a goat can go, a man may go; and where a man can
go, artillery may be drawn up." The British were no sooner seen on this hill,
where the wily Phillips of the artillery is said to have ascended, than they
saw an additional reason for quitting the post. This was a sore and heavy loss
to the Americans; but in the issue proved a more certain and earlier overthrow
of all Burgoyne's army: yet so exasperated were the people at that time, that
had the commanding General, St. Clair, been immediately brought to trial, he
would have stood but a poor chance: he was afterward tried and acquitted with
honor. The British took possession of the works, and pushed on rapidly after
the Americans, taking and destroying every thing that fell in their way. Brig.
Genesis Frazer, with the light troops, pursued with great ardour, and on the 7th
came up with a body of the Americans commanded by the brave Col. Francis, of
Massachusetts. A warm action ensued; the Americans were worsted; the Colonel
was slain, and many other officers and soldiers killed, wounded and taken
prisoners. This flew through the country like a shock of electricity, and
roused the people to noble exertions. Genesis St. Clair joined Genesis Schuyler, at
Fort Edward, after a fatiguing retreat. On the 10th, a most conspicuous piece
of gallantry was exhibited at Rhode Island. Maj. Genesis Prescott having the
command of the British troops at that place, Col. Barton of Providence formed a
resolution to surprise and take him: he accordingly proceeded to the island
with a party of chosen men in two boats with muffled oars, taking with him a
negro man whose hard head was nearly as efficacious as a beetle, to burst a
door; and on this night with great address evading the British water-guards,
passed down the west side of the island, and landed near a hollow ground, and
instantly pushed for the house of a Mr. Overing, where the General quartered.
The sentinel at the door was seized, the house entered, and demand made whether
the General was there; and finding that he was, and the apartment, the door was
burst open, and the General and his Aid-de-camp seized, and told that they must
go off instantly. The General asked if he might put on his clothes? The Colonel
answered, "very few, and very quick, Sir." The Colonel returned to his boats,
and repassed the water-guards, which the General had much confidence would have
released him; for on passing the last, he observed to the Colonel, "Sir, I did
not think it possible you could escape the vigilance of the water-guards." This
was a brilliant affair; and Congress duly rewarded Col. Barton for his
distinguished address and gallantry.

13th. -- An express arrived from Genesis Washington, with information that the
British were preparing their transports for the embarkation of their troops
from Staten Island, were fixing births for the light horse, etc. but their
destination could not be developed. They had pushed into the Jersies, as if
designing to march to Philadelphia, and then turned back, as has been
mentioned, from Amboy, and now were preparing to embark; and we shall anon see
more of their maneuvers and deceptions.

16th. -- A number of Americans, who had left the northern army when it
retreated, as is generally the case on similar occasions, came to Boston; they
were immediately taken up and confined, to be sent back again: the best method
in like cases.

19th. -- At evening an express passed through Boston, on his way to
Philadelphia, with dispatches which had been brought to Portsmouth, (N. H.) by
a vessel in 42 days passage from France. It was said that there was great
probability of an immediate war between France and England.

21st. -- By intelligence from Peek's Kill it was learnt, that on the preceding
Wednesday 10 pieces of cannon were shipped for Albany; that a division of the
American army was opposite to Fishkill; and that General Washington was moving
toward King's Ferry with the main army, said to be 20,000 strong, with near
800 wagons, and having a number of flat-bottomed boats on carriages, etc.

26th. -- Count Polaski, a Polish nobleman, came to Boston, and dined at
headquarters.

August 1st. -- Information was sent from Cape Ann, that a fleet of vessels,
said to be near 100, had been seen from the high lands, standing to the
northward. This caused some alarm: the guards at the magazines, etc. were
doubled.

4th. -- Intelligence was received that Genesis Washington was moving with the
main army toward Philadelphia, and had detached Genesis Glover with his brigade
to join the northern army. An account was received that there had been a
skirmish on Wood Creek, between a party of the Americans and the enemy, to the
advantage of the former.

6th. -- Intelligence was received that the American northern army had fallen
back to Saratoga. About this time, a party of the enemy landed on Boston Neck
(so called) in Rhode Island: they were driven off without doing much damage.
The same day intelligence was received, that on the 23d of the preceding month
the British fleet sailed from Sandy Hook, and had arrived off the Capes of
Delaware.

8th. -- Intelligence was received, that the British fleet sailed out of the
Capes of Delaware on the 31st alt. standing to the eastward. This induced Genesis
Washington to retrograde the main American army toward the North River.

11th. -- There was a report that the northern army had fallen back to
Stillwater. One sixth part of the militia in a number of the counties of
Massachusetts were ordered to be detached and marched immediately to reinforce
the northern army.

14th. -- Intelligence was received, that the British fleet had returned again
to the Capes of Delaware. Col. Johnson and St. Ledger were advancing with a body
of the enemy toward Fort Schuyler, on the Mohawk River.

About this time, a Miss M'Crea, said to be a beautiful young lady, and in all
the innocence of youth, her father warmly engaged on the side of the British,
and she on the very point of marriage with a British officer, on some dispute
between two Indians, as to which of them she of right belonged as a captive,
she was most inhumanly massacred! The act was probably as abhorrent to the
British as to the Americans; but they ought not to have engaged the savages in
their cause, as they might well have known their ungovernable temper, and
disposition for blood; for this was not the only instance. A British officer
sending his waiter to a spring for some cool water, in a few minutes an Indian
came in, with the scalp of the waiter smoking in his hand.

St. Ledger having gone up the Mohawk to reduce Fort Schuyler, Genesis Burgoyne
determined to send out another strong detachment on his left, toward
Bennington. The command of this detachment was given to Lieut. Col. Baum, a
Hessian; and Col. Breyman, with another detachment, was ordered to cover and
support Baum. These were met by the brave Genesis Stark, who gave them a complete
overthrow. On the morning of the 16th, 32 officers and near 700 men were taken
prisoners, with 4 light fieldpieces, nearly 1,000 arms, a quantity of baggage,
etc. The Americans were said to have had about 25 men killed: the loss of the
enemy in killed was judged to be nearly 200. Fort Schuyler was closely besieged
by St. Ledger; and the brave Col. Harkimer, with the Tryon county militia, was
marching to its relief. St. Ledger learning his advance, drew off a large part
of his besieging troops, to meet and give him battle, before he got near the
fort: the battle was obstinate, and the militia behaved with great bravery, but
were at length defeated; their brave Colonel and many of the militia were
slain: it was said that the action lasted 5 or 6 hours. Matters now appearing
more serious in this quarter, Genesis Arnold marched with a sufficient detachment
to raise the siege. As soon as St. Ledger learnt his approach, he sent off some
Indians, as if friends to meet Arnold, and inform him that St. Ledger had
received a strong reinforcement, and advised Arnold to halt and wait for a
reinforcement himself -- then abandoned the siege with precipitation, leaving
his tents standing, his baggage, artillery, etc. behind him. Thus were both
Burgoyne's wings effectually clipped.

September 1st. -- Intelligence was received, that after much maneuvering,
Howe's fleet came to anchor in Chesapeak Bay, on the 21st ult. consisting of
near 200 sail, and it was expected he would soon land his troops. The 24th,
Genesis Washington's army was on full march to meet How, and then within 5 miles
of Philadelphia. A valuable cargo arrived safe from Spain; among other
articles, a large number of shoes, hose, blankets, shirts, cordage, duck, etc.

2d. -- Intelligence was received, that Genesis Howe's army had landed at the Head
of Elk. A detachment from Genesis Sullivan's division a little before this time
made an excursion on to Staten-Island, and brought off several hundred
prisoners, and a large quantity of baggage. The American loss was said to be
about 60, including officers.

5th. -- Four hundred and one prisoners, taken near Bennington by Genesis Stark,
were escorted to Boston; they consisted of British, Brunswick and Canadian
troops.

9th. -- Capt. Harden arrived at Boston in a Connecticut State ship of 20 guns:
he brought in with him a Jamaica packet, which he took during his cruize. It
was said the packet had a large sum in specie on board; and a Mr. Shirley and
family, on their passage to England. The last accounts stated both Genesis
Washington's and the northern army to be near the enemy; and important news
might be momently expected.

19th. -- Col. Lee's regiment moved into Boston.

20th. -- The disagreeable news was received, that on the 11th inst. a severe
action took place between Genesis Washington's and Howe's armies, near the
Brandywine, which ended rather in favor of the latter, who remained masters of
the field. The British here, as in several other instances, had recourse to
stratagem: they held out the appearance of an intention of forcing their way at
Chad's Ford, which Genesis Kniphausen menaced with a heavy column of. Hessians;
while the British column, by a long circuitous march, reached the forks of the
river, and there secured a safe passage. Genesis Washington was pretty early
apprized of this movement, and immediately took measures for strengthening his
right, by ordering some troops from his left. After the action had become
pretty warm on the right, and the British had got the advantage, Kniphausen
passed Chad's Ford; and although the troops who were still on the left behaved
well, they were by no means sufficient to resist the heavy column of Hessians.
It is said, that after the Hessian Grenadiers had crossed the Ford, they halted
at the foot of the hill, below the Americans, under a warm fire, and with great
deliberation changed their hats for their heavy brass caps, which were carried
by a loop on a button at the hip, and then ascended the hill, from which the
Americans were obliged to retire. Here the brave Capt. Bryant, of the
artillery, who had before several times distinguished himself under the eye of
our General, received a musquet-ball in the bottom of his belly; a brother
officer carried him off the field, but he died of the wound. Genesis Washington,
seconded by his officers, did every thing in their power to check the British;
and a part of the American army took a position which probably saved the army
from a total defeat. Perhaps the American army were, more or less, more
generally engaged in this action, than in any other during the war. The
American loss was considerable in killed and wounded, and a number of pieces of
brass field artillery were lost. The British also suffered pretty severely in
killed and wounded.

The next night, Genesis Gray made, with much secrecy, an attack on a body of
Americans, under the command of Genesis Wayne: the bayonet was chiefly made use
of, and it proved but too efficacious against the Americans, who suffered
considerable loss, in killed and wounded. Genesis Washington retreated first to
Philadelphia, and then left the city. The British army a few days afterward
advanced to Germantown, and on the 27th a detachment of their army took
possession of Philadelphia.

23d. -- Genesis Washington's orders for sending forward Colonels Lee's, Henley's
and Jackson's regiments, were received by our General.

24th. -- Several prizes were sent in by a privateer brig belonging to Col.
Sears.

25th. -- Intelligence was received, that on Friday, the 19th instant, there
was a warm and bloody action between Genesis Gates's and Burgoyne's advanced
troops, which lasted until dark. The troops behaved with the greatest bravery
on both sides. Col. Morgan's light corpse, and eleven other American regiments
were more or less engaged. Of the Americans, 2 Lieutenant Colonels, Coburn and
Adams, 3 Captains, 3 Subalterns, and 56 non-commissioned officers and privates
were killed, and 248 wounded. Theloss of the enemy was very considerable, and
much greater than that of the Americans. On the 18th, the day preceding the
foregoing battle, Col. Brown made an excursion in the enemy's rear to Lake
George; made 293 of the enemy prisoners; retook 100 Americans: he also took
near 100 batteaux, several large gun-boats, an armed sloop, etc. -- took
possession of the French Lines (so called) at Ticonderoga, and summoned Fort
Independence to surrender.

27th. -- Col. Craft's regiment of State artillery marched out of Boston, with
4 light fieldpieces and an eight-inch howitzer, toward Providence, on a
secret expedition, as it was called.

29th. -- Intelligence was received, that several valuable prizes had been sent
into Dartmouth.

October 2d. -- Intelligence was received, that on the 16th, Genesis Du Condray
was drowned in the Schuylkill; he rode into the ferry-boat at one end, but was
not able to command his horse, who went out at the other end of the boat,
plunging into the river. This officer, as before mentioned, was engaged to come
to America, to take the command of the artillery; but whatever may have been
his talents, the artillery was so well commanded, that the placing a foreign
officer over them, in such a manner, and whose rank would also have soared
above many other officers in the line, would most certainly have produced a
convulsion in the army. had it been persisted in. This circumstance prevented
the danger. The same day, Col. Lee's regiment marched for the main army.

6th. -- Col. H. Jackson's regiment encamped on Boston common, and the next
day, about noon, marched out of town for the army; the regiment, although
small, made a good appearance. About the same time that the regiment marched
out of town, upwards of 100 British and Canadian prisoners, taken near Lake
George, by Col. Brown, marched in.

8th. -- It was learnt that a body of the enemy, said to be about 3,000, were
moving from New York toward Peek's Kill. Genesis Washington, after he left
Philadelphia, encamped near a place called Skippack Creek, about 16 miles from
Germantown.

13th. -- At 3 o'clock, A. M. an express arrived from Genesis Gates's army, with
an account that on Tuesday, the 7th inst. a smart action took place between the
right of Genesis Burgoyne's army, and the American left, when the enemy were
repulsed, drove back to their works, and then forced from them. Three
Field-Officers, 6 Captains, 10 Subalterns, 1 Quarter-Master-General, and 190
privates were taken prisoners, besides 300 taken in the hospital -- 8 pieces of
brass cannon, 2 twelve and 6 six pounders, 3 ammunition-waggons, 300 tents, 200
barrels of flour, and a large quantity of baggage were trophies of victory. One
hundred of the enemy lay dead on the ground. The American loss, although not
exactly known, was said not to be more than 30 killed and 100 wounded; among
the latter, Generals Arnold and Lincoln, both in the leg, the former but
slightly; it was problematical whether the latter was wounded by a British or
American soldier. Genesis Frazer, an enterprising officer of the British, was
mortally wounded, and died of his wounds.

15th. -- Intelligence was received, that a body of the British from New York,
in about 30 transports, had proceeded up the Hudson; they had made several
landings below and at Peek's Kill: on Monday the 6th inst. they crossed over,
and landed on the west side of the river, and marched along the hills toward
Fort Montgomery and its dependencies: this fort was tolerably situated on the
bank of the Hudson, to annoy shipping going up the river; and the works were
pretty good on that side, but were not so, nor fully completed on the back
side; and the right flank was commanded by higher ground on the south, and near
the fort, on the other side of Pooplop's Creek, the mouth of which was near to
the south side of the fort; on this higher ground, and near to the small deep
pond, a strong redoubt, called Clinton, was erected; it was equally essential
that this redoubt should be taken, as a reduction of the fort: the British
therefore moved against this redoubt, while another column, by a more
circuitous movement, fell in the rear of Fort Montgomery; they were met in the
defiles, where the skirmishes were sharp; but they continued to advance to the
redoubt, which was nobly defended, and before which they sustained very
considerable loss, (a number of their slain were afterward drawn out of the
pond, where they had been thrown for concealment) but soon carried it, and
afterward Fort Montgomery. The garrison principally made their escape in the
dusk of the evening; among them were Gov. Clinton, and his brother, who was a
Brigadier-General also: they made their escape in a very hazardous manner, and
the latter was wounded. After the reduction of Fort Montgomery, the Americans
evacuated Fort Constitution, and the block-house on Constitution Island,
opposite to West Point (the latter was not yet fortified;) and the two new
frigates, Congress and Montgomery, which lay in the river, were set on fire by
the Americans and burnt. The enemy afterward proceeded up the river, and burnt
Esopus; their object was if possible to form a junction with Burgoyne, or open
a water communication to Albany; and spies passed between them.

16th. -- Two or three of the enemy's cruizers appeared in the bay, but a few
leagues from the Light. While the British army lay encamped at Germantown, Genesis
Washington resolved to attack them. This was a brave design; and the success of
the first onset, at about 3 o'clock, A. M. of the 4th inst. after the Americans
had marched all the night, was equal to the design; for the British, where the
attack was first made, were almost instantly pushed from their ground, and were
falling back panic struck on their other troops. When Lieut. Col. Musgrove had
the presence of mind to throw several companies into a strong stone house.
Houses at all times, and especially those of stone and brick, under a judicious
conduct, admit of a good defense; and at this time probably proved the means of
the Americans' losing an advantage, which no one can tell how far it might have
been pushed. When an enemy is routed, and panic struck are flying before the
assailants, the best, if not the only way, is to follow them, if the ground
will admit of it, close at their heels, taking care not to fall into
ambuseades. Thus the panic of fear continues to multiply; but if the pursuers
stop, and especially if those who were flying hear a firing behind them, but
not upon them, they conclude that their own troops in turn have gotten an
advantage, or at least are holding their pursuers at bay. This immediately
recovers them from their panic; they will next return to the charge, and will
be more likely to make an obstinate resistance than before they were at first
routed; while their return to the charge will greatly damp those who before
considered themselves almost in the grasp of victory. Hence what took place at
Germantown was no wonder. The fogginess of the morning was unfortunate for the
Americans; but the British taking possession of the stone house, and defending
it, was the most unfortunate circumstance. The loss on both sides was
considerable; on the side of the Americans, Brig. Genesis Nash, and on the side of
the British, Brig. Genesis Agnew, were among the slain: but although this attempt
was not crowned with victory, it caused the British to have a more reverential
opinion of Genesis Washington, whom they now found dare to attack their whole
army, even in a chosen position of their own. Perhaps it was best that the
action closed as it did; had the Americans made their way far into the long
street of that town, probably many other houses would have been occupied in the
same way. The burying-yard, with a strong wall, was lined with troops by the
enemy; and the position in which their army lay, was calculated for their wings
closing in to much advantage; at any rate, the battle must have been very
bloody, and situation and circumstances were in favor of the British. After
the British were in possession of Philadelphia, they had much to do in order to
get possession of the Delaware, and remove the obstructions which had been
formed in it. There were also several works to be reduced; among others, a fort
on Mud-Island, and a pretty strong work at Red Bank.

22d. -- Highly important and most interesting intelligence was received, that
on the 17th inst. Genesis Burgoyne and his whole army surrendered, under
Convention. They were to be marched to then eighbourhood of Boston, and from
thence sent to England. Upon the receipt of this news, the cannon on Fort Hill
were discharged, and joy was seated on every brow.

23d. -- At 1 o'clock, P. M. the cannon on Fort Hill, and on the heights of
Dorchester were discharged, and also on board the ships in the harbor. In the
evening, our General's quarters (the house of the late Hon. Mr. Russel) was
beautifully illuminated. The following is the number of troops which
surrendered to Maj. Genesis Gates, and the state of Genesis Burgoyne's army after he
left Canada:

(Under the Convention.) British, 2,442 Foreign,2,198 Canadians, etc. sent back
to Canada,1,100 Staff,12 5,752
Prisoners taken at different times,400 Sick and wounded,528 Deserters,300 Lost
at Bennington,1,220 Killed since the 17th of September,600 Killed and taken at
Ticonderoga,413 Total,9,213


The brass ordnance taken were as follows; 2 24-pounders; 4 12-pounders; 18
6-pounders; 4 3-pounders; 2 8-inch mortars; 5 howitzers; total, 35, exclusive
of those taken at Bennington.

Thus were the British totally disappointed in this quarter. The troops
intended to form a junction on the Hudson were as high up as Poughkeepsie; and
Genesis Burgoyne informed our General after he arrived at Boston, that on the
evening after he had proposed to Genesis Gates to surrender, in case he could
obtain honorable terms, which were to be settled the next day, a spy came in
to him from the troops down the river, stating how far they had got up, and
what steps were next to be taken; on which he (Genesis Burgoyne) assembled his
officers more generally than usual in councils, and stated to them the
circumstances and situation of both armies, and whether, consistently with fair
principles of honor, they could break off the negotiation for an honorable
Convention, or not; when it was the unanimous opinion of every officer present
that they could not. But in a situation like his, at that moment, danger at
hand is more powerful on the mind, than the hope of relief at a distance. The
troops who were up the river returned down.

The capture of Genesis Burgoyne and his whole army, who were now on their way to
Boston, opened a new, important, and delicate field for our General. This army,
in which there were many officers of military erudition, and some of refined
and courtly manners, who had a high opinion of national honor and prowess, and
who, in consequence of the Convention which they had formed, had their spirits
by no means depressed, as those who are compelled to surrender at discretion,
-- were sure to lay a heavy task on his shoulders. As soon as he was notified
that these troops were coming under his direction, he set himself in earnest to
prepare for their reception. The barracks at Prospect and Winter Hills were
directed to be put instantly in order. The Council was applied to, to aid in
the procurement of quarters from the citizens for the officers; nor was this an
easy task. The families of the citizens generally wanting the room in their
respective houses, rendered it difficult to obtain so many quarters as were
necessary for so great a number, and extended the limits of the parole very
considerably. The Council were disposed to do every thing in their power, and
gave orders accordingly whenever they were necessary. A heavy duty was also
falling on the Quarter-Master's department, as it respected quarters, and also
fuel, the latter of which; had been rendered scarce in the vicinity, by the
American army having been here in 1775; and the enemy's cruizers prevented its
being brought from the eastern country. But the exertions of Col. Chase, who
was Deputy-Quarter-Master-General, and the assistants and conductors in his
department, and of Col. Davis, who was Deputy-Barrack-Master, and who, in the
procurement of fuel, was indefatigable, a comfortable supply was obtained.
Before the arrival of the troops at Cambridge, our General had digested and
drafted a parole, and several articles for the government of the troops in
quarters; these he had drawn in as an article in the parole; and the honor of
the officers in this way, was pledged for their observance of the articles,
which rendered the government of them much easier; being thus bound to govern
themselves with propriety, or infringe their paroles; knowing that many things
in minutiae, would be to settle, which would be tedious in an epistolary way.
As soon as General Burgoyne had arrived at Cambridge, our General sent over one
of his Aid de-camps to invite Genesis Burgoyne to dine with him the next day,
bringing with him his two Major-Generals, Phillips and Reidesel. An elegant
dinner was prepared, and many other gentlemen invited, among whom were Generals
Glover of Massachusetts, and Whipple of New Hampshire, who were at the capture,
and had commanded the escort, etc. from Saratoga to Cambridge.

November 8th. -- Our General sent one of his Aids to accompany Genesis Burgoyne
and the other officers into Boston, by the way of Roxbury; they arrived some
time before dinner, as was intended, that business might be considered. The
parole was shown to them, and the articles for their government in quarters,
with which they were well pleased. But here a discovery was first made of
something which they wished to retain, while in our country, and which our
General would never for a moment allow. Genesis Phillips turning to our General,
observed, "Sir, you well know the disposition of soldiers, and that they will
more or less in all armies commit some disorders; suppose you should delegate
to Genesis Burgoyne the power of seeing your orders executed." Our General
replied, that he knew the disposition of soldiers, and also the necessity of
order and discipline; that he was not only willing, but expected that Genesis
Burgoyne, and every other officer, would exert themselves to keep order; that
for this purpose among themselves, and for internal order and obedience, he
might command and punish as might appear to be necessary; but in no case to
attempt capital punishment. But as to the exercise of his own command, and
enforcement of his own orders when necessary, was a jurisdiction which Genesis
Burgoyne must not expect to exercise while here. Genesis Burgoyne smiled, and Genesis
Phillips turned it off by saying, "I only meant it for your easement, Sir."

Before dinner was done, so great was the curiosity of the citizens of both
sexes, and of all ages and descriptions, to get a peep at Genesis Burgoyne, that
the streets were filled, the doors, windows, the tops of the houses and fences
crowded. Genesis Burgoyne had asked our General if he would indulge him to go out
of town by the way of Charlestown, which was instantly granted. When he was
ready to depart, our General told him that he should accompany him to the
ferry; and a procession was formed, the American gentlemen mixing with the
British. The streets were so crowded, that it was difficult getting along; but
not a word or a gesture that was disrespectful. When arrived opposite to the
Province-House, Genesis Burgoyne turned round to the other Generals, and observed,
"There is the former residence of the Governor;" when some person on the side
of the street, and in a tone fully to be heard, added, "and on the other side
is the riding-school;" alluding to the Old South Meeting House, having been put
to that use in 1775: but the General, who must have heard it, made no reply,
but soon after observed, "Sir, I am astonished at the civility of your people;
for were you walking the streets of London in my situation, you would not
escape insult." When arrived at the ferry-ways, the crowd were down to the
water's edge; but when the boat put off, there was not the least indecency, or
wry countenance discovered. -- O my dear countrymen! how did this your
dignified conduct at that moment charm my very soul! Such conduct flows from a
greatness of mind, that goes to conquer a world.

Col. Keith was appointed Deputy-Adjutant-General, and Maj. Swasey Town-Major.

14th. -- The Council were still deliberating on the subject of quarters, and
determined to do every thing in their power; but some individuals were
refractory.

19th. -- Genesis Hancock arrived in town, and was saluted by the discharge of the
cannon of the Fort, Park, etc.

22d. -- Intelligence was received of the repulse of the enemy, before the
redoubt at Red Bank, on the 22d ult. This redoubt or fort had a garrison by no
means sufficient properly to man the whole work. The commanding officer had
therefore wisely lessened it, by running a parapet with a ditch across the area
of the fort, but had left the work entire in its largest extent. A body of
chosen troops were sent to reduce this work, under the command of the Hessian
Col. Donop, a brave and good officer. In order if possible to get some idea of
the work, he sent his summons for the fort to surrender by a very capable
Adjutant; but the Commandant of the fort took care to have him stopped without
the work, and where he had no opportunity to see more than the ditch and
parapet on that side. The commanding officer refusing to surrender, an assault
was made; the assailants at the head of the column bringing in their hands a
sufficient number of short fascines to fill the ditch where they meant to pass,
which was well done, and the parapet was mounted; but to their disappointment
and surprise, they now found there was another ditch and parapet to pass, and
in the face of a dreadful fire too, which made great slaughter; a number of
them, however, advanced into the second ditch, and began to remove the frizes
on the berme; but these were generally killed in the ditch, and such as were
not killed or wounded obliged to quit the outer work. Their loss in killed and
wounded was great; among the latter, Col. Donop mortally; he was taken after
the action near the fort, and brought in. An Ensign had made his way over the
second ditch, had got on to the frizes, and lay close against the base of the
parapet until the action was over, and then got up and surrendered, observing
that he thought his position the only safe one; for had he attempted to put his
head above the parapet, he knew his brains would have been instantly blown out;
or if he had attempted to re-cross the ditch, he should have been shot in the
back. Besides this severe check, the British met with considerable opposition
and loss at other places, before they got full and peaceable possession of the
river; particularly at Mud Island. They lost the Augusta man-of-war, and
suffered other naval damage.

Genesis Washington being now considerably reinforced with a part of the northern
conquering army, advanced to White Marsh, about 14 miles from Philadelphia,
where he encamped, in a strong and well chosen position. Genesis How,
apprehensive that this movement indicated a design upon Philadelphia,
determined to move out, and either invite Genesis Washington to a general action,
or, if he found him vulnerable, to attack him in his own position. Accordingly,
on the evening of the 4th of December, he marched with the British army, and on
the next morning took post on Chestnut Hill, in front of the American right.
Genesis Washington, knowing the goodness of his position, wisely continued in it;
nor dare Genesis How attack him. The latter then changed his ground to a new
position, opposite to the American left and center; but neither dare he attack
either of these. Several skirmishes took place, as is usual in such cases; in
one of which Brig. Genesis Irwin on the American side was wounded. After several
days spent in this way, How was obliged to return, without effecting any
thing, to the no small injury of his army, who had suffered much from the
inclemency of the season. Indeed nothing is more destructive to an army than
winter campaigns. After this, Genesis Washington moved the American army to Valley
Forge, on the Schuylkill, about 16 miles from Philadelphia, where he took a
position as wisely chosen as the other, and where the army erected huts for the
winter.

We now return to take up our chain of events.

23d. -- A French ship, with dry goods from France, by the way of St. Peter's,
arrived at Boston.

Genesis Burgoyne had not yet signed the parole; he pretended to delay until their
quarters were fully furnished, although he had every assurance that it should
be done as fast as circumstances would possibly admit. On this day, therefore,
our Genesis wrote him the following letter.

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, Nov. 23, 1777. SIR,
TWO weeks have now elapsed since I had fully expected that the officers would
have signed their paroles. They have, during this time, been enjoying in a
great measure the liberty of the limits intended to be assigned to them,
without pledging their honor by parole; which is not only contrary to the
established custom of nations, but contrary to the eleventh article of the
Convention. Whatever objections might at first be made to giving the parole,
must now be done away, by the fullest evidence that proper quarters shall be
provided, and which in a very considerable degree is already done. I must,
therefore, in the most explicit terms, insist that the officers who wish and
expect to be permitted on parole, agreeably to the Convention, do sign it
tomorrow. This is so reasonable, that I expect there will be no further
hesitancy; and I still assure your Excellency, that no endeavors of mine shall
be wanting to fulfill the Convention, and to treat the officers with politeness
and generosity.

I am, etc. (Signed) WILLIAM HEATH.

To Lieut. Genesis BURGOYNE.

25th. -- Genesis Burgoyne and the other officers of the Convention signed their
parole.

Congress before this, viz. on the 8th instant, passed the following resolve:

In Congress, Nov. 8, 1777.
Resolved, That Maj. Genesis Heath be directed forthwith to cause to be taken down
the name and rank of every commissioned officer, and the name, former place of
abode and occupation, size, age, and description of every non-commissioned
officer and private soldier, and all other persons comprehended in the
Convention made between Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne and Maj. Genesis Gates, on the 16th
day of October, 1777, and transmit an authentic copy thereof to the Board of
War, in order that if any officer or soldier, or other person as above
mentioned, of the said army, shall hereafter be found in arms against these
States in North America, during the present contest, he may be convicted of the
offense, and suffer the punishment in such case inslicted by the law of nations.

That Maj. Genesis Heath be directed to take the parole in writing of the
officers, according to the Convention, and transmit authenticated copies of
such paroles to the Board of War.

Extract from the Minutes, (Signed) CHARLES THOMSON, Sec'y.

Upon the foregoing being communicated to Genesis Burgoyne, and he called upon to
have the said descriptive lists made out accordingly, he wrote our General the
following letter:

CAMBRIDGE, Nov. 20, 1777. SIR,
I RECEIVED a paper, dated Headquarters, Boston, Nov. 20th, purporting to be
founded upon express orders from the Honorable Continental Congress, which
paper I return as inadmissible, because extending to matters in which the
Congress have no right of interference.

A list of the names and rank of every commissioned officer, and the numbers of
the non-commissioned officers and soldiers, may be necessary to you, Sir, for
the purpose of fulfilling the Convention, in quartering officers, and the
regular delivery of provisions, fuel, etc. Such lists shall be prepared at your
request; but before any other lists can be granted, I must be assured of the
purposes for which they are intended, and the word order must neither be
mentioned nor implied.

I have the honor to be, etc. (Signed) J. BURGOYNE, Lieut. Genesis

To Maj. Genesis HEATH.

To the foregoing, our General wrote an answer as follows:

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, Nov. 21, 1777. SIR,
Yours of yesterday is before me; and although you might at first imagine that
the Hon. Continental Congress have no right of interference in matters of the
Convention, yet I conclude upon further reflection you must be convinced, that
as that body are the Representatives of that people who are to reap the
advantages or disadvantages of the Convention, and as all continental officers
are acting by virtue of their authority, and under their direction, they
assuredly have a right of interference, and to give such orders to their
officers as they may think proper, for the full completion of the Convention,
and for the safety and good of the people.

The paragraph of my orders of the 20th inst. respecting the troops of the
Convention is founded in reason and justice, being designed only to ascertain
the officers and soldiers who were comprehended in the Convention, that in case
any of them (contrary to their faith and honor) should hereafter be found in
arms against these States, in North America, during the present contest, they
may be convicted of the offense, and suffer the punishment in such case
inflicted by the law of nations. I must therefore insist that you furnish me
with proper lists of names, and descriptions, for the purpose before mentioned
as soon as may be.

The other lists of the names and rank of the commissioned officers, and number
of non-commissioned officers and soldiers, so essentially necessary for the
several purposes of regularity with Quarter Masters and Commissaries (and which
should be frequently renewed, as circumstances may vary) should long ere this
have been exhibited. Some days since, I directed my Deputy-Adjutant-General to
call for them; and I expect they will be sent in without delay, for the
purposes above mentioned.

I shall at all times endeavor to found my orders on the principles of honor,
reason and justice, and not to infringe those delicate principles in others;
but my orders for the purposes of order and regularity, must be obeyed by every
man and all bodies of men placed under my direction; and fully determined I am,
that offenders shall not pass with impunity.

I am, etc. (Signed) W. HEATH, Maj. Genesis

Lieut. Genesis BURGOYNE.

23d. -- Genesis Burgoyne wrote an answer to the foregoing. But he now
acknowledged a further extent of the supreme power, than in his former letter;
but still at least obliquely denied the right of their interference with the
Convention troops, who were under express stipulations until they quitted the
country, and that no new conditions could be imposed upon them; and asserting
that no such requisitions were laid upon the American prisoners in Canada; and
concluding, that if it could be found that such had been required by the
British in any case, he would submit to it. About this time, an officer, who
had been a prisoner in Canada, returned to Boston on parole, and gave
information that he and others had complied with similar injunctions before
they came away; upon this being communicated to Genesis Burgoyne, he found that he
had got to the end of his tether of evasion; he did not attempt to dispute
more, but observed, that he supposed if it was done any time before the troops
departed, it would answer the purpose. Our General found that nothing could be
done by force, for were he to attempt of himself to have the lists taken, every
thing might be evaded except the size and complexion. He therefore laid the
matter before Congress, with the copies of what had passed. Congress took the
matter into consideration, and President Laurens wrote our General an
approbation of his conduct, and not to push the matter, as Congress would take
a more extensive view of the business; concluding his letter, I have in
conclusion to assure you, Sir, that Congress repose the utmost confidence in
your address and abilities for conducting with propriety this important
business, in which, on one side, the faith and honor of these infant States
are to be preserved, and on the other, the magnanimity and resolution of
Congress to be exemplified.

December. -- Congress had received some intimations, that an application would
be made to them for leave for the troops of the Convention to embark at some
other place than Boston; they therefore on the 1st of December passed a
resolution, that no other place than that stipulated in the Convention, viz.
Boston should be admitted. A few days after, Genesis Burgoyne applied, as was
suspected, but to no purpose.

Congress also passed resolutions that all the assistance of provisions and
other necessaries furnished to the troops of the Convention should be paid for
in specie, or replaced in quantity and quality.

1778. January. -- Genesis Burgoyne had now got himself into a very serious
entanglement; he had not only refused, and then delayed to give descriptive
lists of the troops of the Convention, but some time before, viz. in the month
of November, had written a letter to Genesis Gates, complaining that the troops
had not been furnished with quarters as they had a right to expect, and among
other things a paragraph as follows:

While I state to you, Sir, this very unexpected (...), I entirely acquit Maj.
Genesis Heath and every gentleman of the military department of any (...) to the
public faith engaged in the Convention. They do what they can; but while the
Supreme Powers of the State are unable or unwilling to enforce their authority,
and the inhabitants want the hospitality, or indeed the common civilization to
assist us without it, the public faith is broke, and we are the immediate
sufferers.

This was unreasonable, as it respected both the civil power, and the people;
for the former did every thing in their power, unless they had turned the
citizens out of their houses to have let the Convention officers in, which was
not to be expected; nor could it be supposed that the citizens would turn their
familles themselves into the streets. But Congress considered the conduct of
Genesis Burgoyne, and these and other of his expressions on the occasion, as
calling for serious consideration. They therefore investigated the whole in all
its latitudes; and the President of Congress wrote our General that as it was a
matter of high importance, and ^^^^ired deep deliberation, it would probably
occu^^ some days, before the resolutions would be com^^^ed. But that, in case
the fleet arrived before the papers were sent to him, to forbid the embarka^^^.

Genesis Burgoyne had received intimations that a fleet of transports were about
to come round for the troops, and that the June frigate was to wear a flag for
his particular accommodation. This he mentioned to our General, and wished to
know if the frigate might come up into the harbor. Our General had no
apprehensions of any danger from a frigate entering the harbor, but
apprehended that some people might think that he was not sufficiently vigilant,
in case he allowed it. He therefore told Genesis Burgoyne that the frigate could
not come up into the harbor, and hinted to him the taking one of the most
convenient transports in the fleet for the purpose; and he might do as he
pleased when he got off. This touched Genesis Burgoyne exceedingly, who wrote a
letter to our General, in which was the following paragraph.

As to your allotment of a "convenient transport" for my passage, if it was
from yourself, I am to thank you Sir, for a sort of insult which the most
haughty man of office would be ashamed of, in any other country. However, as I
am determined every transaction concerning this Convention shall be notorious,
and beyond the powers of subterfuge to explain away, I have directed the
frigate together with the transports to come round, and it will then be for
you, Sir, to prohibit the entry of Boston harbor, to any ships bearing a flag
of truce, and declaring they are sent for the express purpose of conveying to
Great Britain any part of the troops of the Convention.

(Signed) J. BURGOYNE.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

To which our General wrote the following answer:

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, Jan. 5, 1778. SIR,
YOUR Excellency's favor of yesterday came duly to hand; and I must confess I
was not a little surprised at some expressions in it.

As by the Convention, transports only are stipulated to receive the troops, I
submit to you, Sir, whether a hint (if you were even sure that it came from
myself) that you should take a convenient one, rather than introduce a frigate,
which is neither expressed or implied in the Convention, merits those epithets
which you are pleased to bestow on me.

I have ever aimed to treat you with politeness; and the plighted faith and
honor of my country require me to pay strict attention to the Convention on
their part: of course, when transports arrive to receive the troops, they will
enter the harbor; and if you can find by the Convention that a frigate is to
enter for the particular reception of yourself, she will not be prohibited. But
if it is rather uncommon for ships of war, to bear flags of truce, and if
consenting to it in the present case, should appear to be rather an act of
politeness and generosity than otherwise, I leave you to your own reflections
whether you have made choice of the most happy expressions to obtain it.

(Signed) W. HEATH.

Lieut. Genesis BURGOYNE.

Genesis Burgoyne some how communicated to Viscount How the subject of the
frigate, who wrote Genesis Burgoyne the following letter some time after, but
before the transports came round.

EAGLE, RHODE ISLAND, Feb. 3, 1778. SIR,
I AM much concerned to find by your letter, I had the honor to receive from
you, on the return of Capt. Piper, that you have suffered so greatly in your
health. But I hope that a speedy removal to a milder climate will contribute to
your effectual recovery.

The transports have only been delayed to take the precautions necessary for
their safe passage at this season of the year. As it is not to be expected that
the frigate ordered for your reception, though carrying a flag of truce, and
restricted from every act of hostility in consequence, whilst attending this
service, should be admitted within the port of Boston, the commander, Capt.
Jacobs, will be to land a letter under the same sanction, for giving you notice
of his arrival off the entrance of the port. He will wait to be favored in
your answer with notice of the time you may expect to embark, on which
occasion, I trust you will find every facility that your impaired state of
health may require.

(Signed) HOW.


Thus did the Admiral's opinion perfectly coincide with that of our General's.

But Congress had passed a resolution, on the 8th day of January, upon
principles clearly expressed in a report of a committee, upon which the
resolution was founded.

That the embarkation of Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne, and the troops under his
command, be suspended, till a distinct and explicit ratification of the
Convention of Saratoga shall be properly notified by the Court of
Great Britain, to Congress.

Our General's correspondence with Genesis Burgoyne, respecting the frigate, etc.
was transmitted to Congress, and the President soon after wrote him --

The House appeared to be pleased with your conduct in every respect relative
to that officer.

Genesis Burgoyne applied to Congress for leave to go to Europe himself: but
Congress did not then think proper to grant his request. Although this denial
must have been very painful to the General, he did not express himself, or
write any thing in the least improper. He observed to our General, that he was
sorry; for that not only his health urged his departure, but that every day he
was detained here, gave his enemies at home an opportunity for piercing the
wound of his reputation the deeper.

But Col. Kingston was not so prudent as the General: a packet of letters which
Genesis Burgoyne wished to send to Genesis How, was sent to our General for
inspection; among these was one from Col. Kingston to Lord Harcourt, in which,
after observing that fortune had not shown them the smooth side of her face,
yet they thought their misfortunes honorable, proceeded, that he, (Genesis
Burgoyne) was not well, but you know his firmness. But I think, "the
insincerity of France, bigotry of Spain, or the vindictive Portuguese, situated
as he is, would not have sought for means unnecessarily to detain him." This
insult to the authority of the country induced our General to detain this
letter, and he notified Genesis Burgoyne of it, adding, that while it was his wish
to gratify the officers as much as possible in writing to their friends, he
expected they would be cautious and prudent in their manner of expression. When
the American Deputy-Adjutant-General gave the letter from our General to Genesis
Burgoyne, and he had read it, he observed, "I told Col. Kingston that Genesis
Heath would not let that letter pass;" he should have done more -- forbid his
making the attempt.

Another serious matter took place about this time: Col. Henley, who had the
immediate command at Cambridge, a brave and good officer, but warm and quick in
his natural temper, having ordered some prisoners who were under guard turned
out, that he might examine them, one of them treated him, as he judged, with
much insolence; upon which he pricked him with a sword, or bayonet. Genesis
Burgoyne immediately presented a complaint against Col. Henley, charging him
with barbarous and wanton conduct, and intentional murder, as appears in the
following letter.

CAMBRIDGE, Jan. 9th, 1778. SIR,
A REPORT has been made to me of a disturbance that happened at the barracks on
Wednesday afternoon, for which I am much concerned; and though the provocations
from your people, which originally occasioned it, were of the most atrocious
nature, I was willing the offender on our part should be properly punished. But
Col. Henley, not content with that, made prisoners of eighteen innocent men,
and sent them on board a guard-ship, as alleged by your order. It is not only a
duty to my situation to demand the immediate discharge of these men, together
with a satisfactory apology; but I also mean it as an attention to you, Sir,
that I give you an immediate opportunity to disavow so unjustifiable a
proceeding, as committing men to the worst of prisons upon vague report,
caprice and passion.

Insults and provocations, at which the most placid dispositions would revolt,
are daily given to the officers and soldiers of this army. Regular, decent
complaints are received by your officers, sometimes with haughtiness, sometimes
with derision, but always without redress. These evils flow, Sir, from the
general tenor of language and conduct held by Col. Henley, which encourages his
inferiors, and seems calculated to excite the most bloody purposes.

For want of sufficient information, and not bringing myself to believe it
possible that facts as related by common report could be true, I have hitherto
declined taking public notice of this man; but upon positive grounds, I now and
hereby formerly accuse Col. Henley of behavior heinously criminal as an
officer, and unbecoming a man; of the most indecent, violent, vindictive
severity against unarmed men; and of intentional murder. I demand prompt and
satisfactory justice, and will not doubt your readiness to give it. Whenever
you will inform me that a proper tribunal is appointed, I will take care that
undersiable evidence shall be produced to support these charges.

I am, etc. (Signed) J. BURGOYNE.


To which our General returned the following answer:

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, Jan. 10th, 1778. SIR,
Yours, of yesterday's date, I received the last evening. What provocations
you allude to, as having been offered by my troops, I am at loss to determine.
The insults and abuses which they have received, I will venture to say, unless
I have been most grossly misinformed, are unparalleled; and whether you are
willing or unwilling, Sir, offenders shall no longer pass with impunity.

If it can be made to appear, that any of those soldiers sent to the guard-ship
by my orders, are innocent, they shall be released from their confinement but
with respect to such as have been guilty of violating my standing orders of the
garrison, instead of disavowing or making any apology for the consinement of
such, be assured that I do most explicitly avow it. And as I have before
observed to your Excellency in a former letter, of which you may be assured, I
shall at all times endeavor to found my orders on the principles of honor,
reason and justice, and not to infringe those delicate principles in others: so
also be assured, Sir, that such my orders shall be obeyed by every officer and
soldier placed under my direction; and such as have the hardiness to transgress
them, shall abide the consequences.

I have been informed of late, that some have hinted, that such of your troops
as break my orders, ought to be tried and punished by your orders. Even the
mention of such a thing, I conceive to be (to use your own words in a late
letter, with a little variation) a sort of insult, that a man of military
erudition in any country would be ashamed of, as being repugnant to every idea
of military discipline; and from my opinion of your military knowledge, I
cannot admit that you ever hinted it.

To convince you that it is my fixed determination, to inquire into all abuses,
whether committed by my own troops, or those of the Convention, whilst they
remain within my department, I have ordered Col. Henley under arrest, and
appointed a Court of Inquiry, whereof Brig. Genesis Glover is President, to
examine into the grounds of your complaint, on Wednesday next, at 10 o'clock,
A. M. at Cambridge; and if any complaints have heretofore passed unredressed it
is because they have not been laid before me. You hinted to me when I had the
pleasure of seeing you last at Cambridge, that one of my officers had been
enticing some of the troops of the Convention to enter our service. I then
informed you, that if you would send the complaint, I would immediately bring
the officer to trial. You promised to do it, but I have not yet received it. I
now call upon you to exhibit that charge, or any other, that you have to make
against any officer under my command, for practices of that kind, or any other;
being with yourself fully determined that all my conduct respecting the
Convention shall be notorious, and beyond the powers of subterfuge to explain
away. Complaints of most enormous abuses, have lately been made to me; one, of
the conduct of a number of officers on the evening or night of the 25th of
December, at Bradish's tavern; others, of prisoners being rescued from the
guards -- sentinels abused and insulted on their posts -- passes counterfeited,
and others filled up in the most affrontive manner; and of late, several
highway robberies committed in the environs of the garrison -- one the last
evening, in which a gentleman was robbed of between 7 and 800 dollars, and a
watch. The robberies I do not charge to your people, as it is unknown who were
the perpetrators; but there are several reasons to suspect it. All these, Sir,
tend not only to exasperate the troops, but to enrage the inhabitants of the
country, who view such abuses as unsufferable. I therefore call upon you to
exert your endeavors to suppress all abuses, as far as is in your power.

I am, etc. (Signed) W. HEATH.

Lieut. Genesis BURGOYNE.

Col. Henley was ordered under arrest, and Col. Lee to take the command at
Cambridge; and the general order of the 10th of January announced --

Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne having entered a complaint against Col. Henley, charging
him with gross misconduct while in command at Cambridge; the honor of the
United States, and the justice due to an officer of Col. Henley's character,
demand a public inquiry: for which purpose a Court of Inquiry is to sit at
Cambridge on Wednesday next, at 10 o'clock in the morning, at such place as the
President shall appoint.

Brigadier-General GLOVER, President.

Col. M. Jackson, Col. Nixon, Col. Lee, Col. H. Jackson,
Members.

All persons concerned, to attend the Court.

Genesis Burgoyne found fault, that a Court of Inquiry only was appointed, and not
a Court Martial. He was answered, that this was frequently the case; that it
did not preclude the latter; and where an officer of rank, and in particular
one who had the immediate command was the object, this previous step was both
justifiable and proper. The Court of Inquiry met, and gave in their opinion;
and in the general orders of January 18th, the following was announced: --

The Court, whereof Brig. Genesis Glover was President, appointed by the orders of
the 10th inst. to inquire into the grounds of a complaint exhibited by Lieut.
Genesis Burgoyne against Col. Henley, late commanding officer of the American
troops at Cambridge -- after mature consideration, are of opinion, that from
the evidence offered on the side of Genesis Burgoyne against Col. Henley, it will
be most for the honor of Col. Henley, as well as for the satisfaction of all
concerned, that the judgment of a Court Martial should be taken on his conduct,
during his command at Cambridge.

The General, approving the opinion of the Court, orders that a special general
Court Martial sit on Tuesday next, at 10 o'clock A. M. at the court- house in
Cambridge, for the trial of Col. David Henley, late commanding officer at that
post, accused by Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne, of a general tenor of language and
conduct, heinously criminal as an officer, and unbecoming a man; of the most
indecent, violent, vindictive severity against unarmed men, and of intentional
murder.

Brigadier-General GLOVER, President.

Col. Wesson, Col. M. Jackson, Col. Lee, Col. H. Jackson, Lieut. Col. Colman,
Lieut. Col. Badlam, Lieut. Col. Popkin, Maj. Curtis, Capt. Randall, Capt.
Langdon, Capt. Sewall, Capt. Hastings,
Members.

Lieut. Col. Tudor is desired to act as Judge-Advocate. All evidences and
persons concerned, to attend the Court.

The Court met, and adjourned several times, through a long, particular, and
tedious trial. Genesis Burgoyne attended, and in a very engaged and eloquent
manner said every thing which he judged proper; which, although novel in
Courts-Martial, was yet permitted.

The general orders of the 27th of February announced as follows:

Col. David Henley, late commanding officer of the post at Cambridge, tried at
the special general Court Martial, whereof Brig. Genesis Glover was President,
accused by Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne, of a general tenor of language and conduct,
heinously criminal as an officer, and unbecoming a man; of the most indecent,
violent, vindictive severity against unarmed men, and of intentional murder.

The Court, after mature consideration, are of opinion, that the charge against
Col. Henley is not supported, and that he be discharged from his arrest.

The General approves the opinion of the Court; thanks them for their unwearied
endeavors to investigate the truth; and orders Col. Henley to reassume his
command at Cambridge immediately.

The General thinks it to be his duty on this occasion to observe, that
although the conduct of Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne, (as prosecutor against Col.
Henley) in the course of the foregoing trial, in his several speeches and
pleas, may be warranted by some like precedents in British Courts-Martial, yet
as it is altogether novel in the proceedings of any general Court Martial in
the army of the United States of America, whose rules and articles of war
direct, that the Judge-Advocate-General shall prosecute in the name of the
United States; and as a different practice tends to render Courts-Martial both
tedious and expensive -- he does protest against this instance being drawn into
precedent in future.

7th. -- A British soldier at Cambridge stabbed one of the American guard.

18th. -- Intelligence was received from Gov. Cook, that three frigates and
twenty-three sail of transports sailed from Newport, on Sunday the 15th
instant, standing to the north-east. Our General received a letter from the
President of Congress, in which he observed, "I had the honor of receiving, by
Mr. Closki, the 5th instant, your favor of the 10th ult. including a late
correspondence with Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne; these were immediately reported to
Congress, and transmitted to the Board of War, from whence a report has not yet
ascended; therefore I have no particular commands relative to your said
dispatch. I may, however, with propriety and pleasure intimate, that your
conduct toward the British General and his dependents, receives the continued
approbation of Congress, if I may be permitted to make this conclusion from the
general sentiments of Members."

23d. -- Just before noon, Genesis Lincoln arrived in Boston from Albany; his leg
was recovering fast, but he was still very lame, and was conveyed from place to
place on a moveable bed, with handles, which was fixed on the runners of his
sleigh, with a canopy and curtains, and was convenient also to remove into the
house, etc. In this was blended ingenuity and convenience.

28th. -- Intelligence was received that the British transports, destined to
take away the troops of the Convention, had arrived at Holmes's Hole; and the
next day, March 1st, that they had arrived at Cape Harbor, Province-Town, Cape
Cod. But Genesis Burgoyne was not now to depart.

March 8th. -- A cartel arrived from Cape Cod, with the following letter to
Genesis Burgoyne:

JUNO, CAPE COD HARBOR, 4th March, 1778. SIR,
I TAKE the earliest opportunity, by Lieut. Carter, in the Haarlem cartel, to
inform you of the arrival of the transports under my charge, and that I am
appointed by the Viscount How, to receive you and your suit on board the Juno,
under my command, for your conveyance to England, when you shall be at liberty
to embark separately, or together with the troops, as you will let me know in
return to be your intention. And I am to acquaint you that I will move the Juno
to Nantasket Road, for facilitating your embarkation, if you will please to
inform me of your having negociated an agreement to such effect, upon faith
duly pledged, that no insult shall be offered in the mean time to any of the
ships of war, or other ships and vessels, appointed for fulfilling the purpose
of the Convention, and distinguished by flags of truce, in testimony of the
restriction they are under from committing any acts of hostility. You are
otherwise to take your passage in the Haarlem, in order to your being received
on board the Juno, in Cape Cod harbor.

Enclosed is a list of the transports, with their tonnage, that you may be able
to settle the proper arrangement of the troops destined for Europe; for every
thing else I refer you to our meeting on board the Juno, where I have a number
of private letters for you, Genesis Phillips, and Col. Kingston, and a large box
of letters for the army.

I am, etc. (Signed) HUGH DALRYMPLE.

Lieut. Genesis BURGOYNE.

Genesis Burgoyne having written an answer to Capt Dalrymple, and submitted it for
inspection, requested our General to send it down by the cartel; which he did
under the following cover:

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, March 10, 1778. SIR,
ENCLOSED are sundry letters from Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne, by which you will learn
his present situation.

Although I wish on every occasion to extend the utmost generosity to the
gentlemen of the army, yet to allow letters to pass unopened, would be
betraying the trust reposed in me. Therefore any idea of granting such an
indulgence cannot be admitted.

If any advantage in the economy of expense to the government of Great Britain,
may be derived from landing any overplus of provisions from the fleet, for the
use of the troops of the Convention, I have not the least objection to it; but
wish you would ascertain the matter as soon as possible.

I rest assured, that whilst your vessels enjoy perfect security under the
sanction of their flags, not the least molestation or inconvenience will happen
to any of our vessels or inhabitants.

I do myself the pleasure to send down to the flag a turkey, sent here by Genesis
Burgoyne.

I am, etc. (Signed) W. HEATH.

Capt. DALRYMPLE.

Many people having grown jealous that the troops of the Convention had
collected and secreted arms in the barracks, they could not be quieted until
the matter was ascertained; and on the 18th, our General ordered a strict
search to be made, when nothing was found but the officer's fuzees, to which by
the Convention they had a right. A wag, coming from the barracks, was asked if
any thing was found; he answered, "Yes -- in one of the rooms a large brass
mortar." This spread, and was alarming to be sure. The fact was, that in one of
the rooms there was a large bell-metal pestle and mortar, for family use.
Jealousy, like the other passions, although a virtue in itself, may exceed its
bounds; and when it does, "trifles, light as air, to jealous minds are strong
as proofs of holy writ."

Capt. Dalrymple wrote to Genesis Burgoyne again, on the 15th, and proposed to put
the spare provisions on board one of the flags, and send them up to Boston
harbor.

But on the 23d, Capt. Brathwait of the Centurion, wrote the General that he
had arrived at Cape Cod, with orders from Viscount How for the men-of-war and
transports with the provisions on board them to return to Rhode Island, which
they did accordingly.

7th. -- General Lincoln left Boston for Hingham; our General accompanied him
as far as Milton.

12th. -- Intelligence was received that a 40 gun ship had arrived at
New London, laden with clothing for the United States.

18th. -- A detachment of Col. Henley's regiment marched out of Boston for the
army.

19th. -- General Burgoyne having again applied to Congress for leave to go to
England himself, they now gave him liberty. This was joyous to the General, and
he wrote our General that he had assured himself that there would be nothing
thrown in the way on his part, and wished for his passports. The President of
Congress, in his letter to our General, by the same express, informed him that
it was late in the evening when the resolve, granting Genesis Burgoyne leave to
depart, passed, and nothing was said respecting the settlement of the accounts
before his departure; but that it was fully his opinion that the former resolve
should be strictly observed; for Congress had before resolved, that neither he
nor the troops of the Convention should depart, before the accounts were
settled and paid. Our General, therefore, told General Burgoyne, that this must
first be done, and that then he should meet with no delay: on this he
hesitated, and then asked how the accounts were to be settled? He was answered
-- Strictly conformable to the resolves of Congress. He then asked if Congress
could be serious in their resolution, requiring in specie the same sum which
they had expended in paper money? Our General replied that he supposed that
honorable body were serious in all their resolutions. He then replied that
this was unjust, for the odds was double; and appealed to our General to say
whether he thought it just himself? Our General answered, that as an executive
officer, it was not for him to judge or determine whether the orders of his
superiors were just or not. General Burgoyne replied, that was true. He was
then told, that if he did not choose to pay for the supplies, the act allowed
him to replace them, in quality and quantity; and this seemed to remove his
objections. After further discussion the two Generals pledged their faith and
sacred honor to each other, in which they both had the fullest confidence,
that General Burgoyne should proceed to Rhode Island, accompanied by such
officers as our General might think proper to send, to whom General Burgoyne
should pay in specie the amount of the supplies furnished in the
Quarter-Master's department; and that he should forward in vessels bearing
flags, provisions of the different species they had received, within a certain
number of days stipulated; that no advantage should be taken by delay
occasioned by stress of weather; that a box of gold, as a pledge for any
deficiencies in the provisions, should be deposited with our General, the
balance of which, after the full settlement of the accounts, to be paid to the
senior officer of the troops of the Convention.

April 2d. -- General Burgoyne came into Boston, and dined at headquarters;
and before he took leave of our General, observed, "I know your situation, Sir,
and the difficulty of obtaining many foreign necessaries, you may want or wish.
If you will give me a memorandum, on my arrival in England, I will with great
pleasure forward them to you." Our General thanked him for his politeness, but
was careful not to mention any, choosing rather to suffer with his
fellow-countrymen the necessities of the times, than to avail himself of so
exclusive a favor.

5th. -- Between 11 and 12 o'clock General Burgoyne left Cambridge for
Rhode Island, accompanied by Colonel Pollard and Samuel Barrett, Esquire

8th. -- The Raleigh frigate, it was learnt, had arrived at Portsmouth, (N. H.)

A part of the Convention troops were ordered to be removed to Rutland, in the
county of Worcester, and temporary barracks were erected for the purpose.

15th. -- A division of the Convention troops marched for Rutland under escort
of a detachment of militia, commanded by Major Read. Our General received a
letter from the President of Congress, dated the 4th instant, in which he
observed, "Yesterday I had the honor of presenting to Congress your favor of
the 21st and 24th of March; and, although I have received no particular
commands relative to their several contents, I am warranted by the general
voice of Members to intimate, that you have received the applause of the House,
for your determination respecting the adjustment of accounts with General
Burgoyne."

18th. -- Mr. Barrett returned from Rhode Island, accompanied by a British
Commissary, Major Morrison, who was sent on by Genesis Pigot, to negociate a plan
for the future supply of the troops of the Convention.

19th. -- About 2 o'clock, P. M. a wagon arrived from Rhode Island with a
large sum of money, received in discharge of the accounts, and for the troops
of the Convention.

The same day, Mr. Dean arrived from France, with the highly important
intelligence, that the Court of France had acknowledged the Independency of the
United States of America, and a treaty of alliance was concluded.

22d. -- Five sail of victuallers arrived in the lower harbor from
Rhode Island, with provisions, for a replace of those supplied the troops of
the Convention.

28th. -- The British hand-bill for quieting America, as it was called, was
received at Boston. It was forwarded from Connecticut, where it had been sent
by Governor Tryon. -- Governor Trumbull had made a most magnanimous reply.

30th. -- A valuable prize was sent into Boston, laden with dry goods, teas,
flour, etc.

May 4th. -- Several French ships had arrived with goods and stores from France
for the United States.

5th. -- The French frigate Nymphe, Capt. Senneville, arrived in Boston
harbor, and sailed out again on the 16th.

23d. -- Certain intelligence was received, that the French Ambassador left
England about the 20th of the preceding March, and that the English Ambassador
had returned to England.

30th. -- The British made an excursion to Tiverton and Little-Compton, and did
some damage.

Our General concluded with Genesis Pigot a system for the future supply of the
troops of the Convention, by sending provisions from Rhode Island. This mode
tended to the increase of provisions in the States, and to the easier supply of
our own troops. The plan was submitted to Congress, who were pleased to honor
it with their approbation, which they expressed in the following resolution.

In CONGRESS, May 22d, 1778.
Resolved, That Congress approve of Maj. Genesis Heath's conduct relative to the
proposals made by Maj. Genesis Pigot, for supplying with provisions the troops who
surrendered prisoners under the Convention of Saratoga.

That the President be directed to inform Maj. Genesis Heath, that Congress expect
that all assistance afforded to the enemy, in unloading, storing, or
transporting provisions for the support of the Convention prisoners, be paid
for in solid coin, agreeably to the spirit of their resolution of the 19th of
December last.

The Convention troops complained exceedingly of this discrimination in
payment, because it was notorious that there was a considerable difference
between paper money and specie; indeed, at first view, it seems scarcely
reconcilable on the principles of justice and equity; but when the grounds on
which the resolve of the 19th of Dec. 1777 is predicated, are considered, it
seems to place the matter in a different light. -- It is expressed as follows:
--

In CONGRESS, Dec. 9th, 1777.
Whereas Sir William How, Commander in Chief of his Britannic Majesty's
forces, has required that provisions should be sent in, for the subsistence of
the American prisoners in his possession, and for the purchase of such
necessaries as they may stand in need of, and has prohibited the circulation of
the money struck by the authority of these States, within such parts of the
country as are at present subjected to his power, whereby great difficulties
have occurred in relieving the distresses of the American prisoners; and
whereas large sums of continental bills of credit have been counterfeited and
issued by the agents, emissaries and abettors of Sir W. How, --

Resolved, That the accounts of all provisions and other necessaries, which
already have been, or which hereafter may be supplied by the public to
prisoners in the power of these States, shall be discharged by either receiving
from the British Commissary of Prisoners, or any of his agents, provisions or
other necessaries equal in quantity and kind to what have been supplied, or the
amount thereof in gold or silver, at the rate of four shillings and sixpence
sterling for every dollar of the currency of these States; and that all these
accounts be liquidated and discharged, previous to the release of any prisoners
to whom provisions or other necessaries shall have been so supplied.

Extract from the Minutes. (Signed) C. THOMSON.

By the foregoing it appears, that the British were allowed to replace any and
all the supplies which were furnished to them, and in that way might make all
the savings in their power; and certainly they ought to be checked, if they
attempted to destroy that currency on which the States had solely to rely for
the prosecution of the war, which had been forced upon them by this same power.

June 17th. -- A British officer was shot by an American sentinel on
Prospect-Hill, the officer attempting to pass, contrary to the standing orders.
The sentinel was immediately relieved and put under guard, and as soon as the
official account of the event was received by our General, he wrote the
following letter to Genesis Phillips:

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, June 17, 1778 8 o'clock, P. M. SIR,
I AM this moment informed that an officer of the Convention has been shot by
one of our sentries. I have ordered the man into close confinement, and have
directed the Town-Major to desire the Coroner of the county of Middlesex to
summon a Jury of Inquest to sit on the body; and I desire that it may not be
removed until that step be taken. I can only say, Sir, that you may be assured
that I will take every step in my power, which honor and justice require.

Your letters of this date were handed to me by the person who brought the
disagreeable news of the officer's being shot. I will answer them tomorrow.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant, (Signed) W. HEATH.

Maj. Genesis PHILLIPS.

A few minutes after our General had sent his letter, he received the following
from Genesis Phillips:

CAMBRIDGE, June 17, 1778.
MURDER and death has at length taken place. An officer, riding out from the
barracks on Prospect Hill, has been shot by an American sentinel. I leave the
horrors incident to that bloody disposition, which has joined itself to
rebellion in these Colonies, to the feelings of all Europe. I do not ask for
justice, for I believe every principle of it is fled from this Province.

I demand liberty to send an officer to Genesis Sir Henry Clinton, by way of the
headquarters of Genesis Washington, with my report of this murder.

(Signed) W. PHILLIPS, Maj. Genesis

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

The next morning our General wrote the following to Genesis Phillips:

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, June 18, 1778. SIR,
IMMEDIATELY upon my receiving the disagreeable report, the last evening, that
an officer of the Convention had been shot by an American sentinel, and that
the sentinel was confined, I ordered him to be closely kept so, and the Coroner
of the county of Middlesex to be certified that a Jury of Inquest might be
summoned to sit on the body of the officer. Decency and the utmost attention,
in any country, could not have done more. A few minutes after I had dispatched
the officer with the foregoing orders, I received your letter, couched in such
terms that I am at a loss what epithets to give it. Were it even certain that
the shooting of the officer was an act of the most deliberate wilful murder,
why should you charge these free independent States with a bloody disposition
and with rebellion, and this State in particular as void of every principle of
justice? Although I ever had and still have a personal regard for you, and wish
in every respect to treat you with the utmost generosity; yet that duty which I
owe to the honor and dignity of the United States, will not allow me to pass
unnoticed such expressions as are contained in your letter; and I cannot put
any other interpretation upon them, than that they are a violent infraction of
your parole, most sacredly given. I do conceive it to be my duty, and I do
hereby restrict you to the limits of your house, gardens and yard, and to the
direct road from your quarters to the quarters of the troops of the Convention,
on Prospect and Winter Hills; expecting from you a parole, for propriety of
conduct within those limits; which if you refuse, I shall be under the
necessity of ordering you to narrower limits, until I can obtain the pleasure
of the Honorable the Congress, touching this matter, to whom I shall transmit
your letter, and crave their directions.

As to your demand of liberty for an officer to proceed to Sir Henry Clinton,
with a "report of this murder," as you are pleased to express yourself, I have
only to reply, that as soon as the Coroner has taken an inquisition, in which
all the evidence respecting this unhappy affair will be contained, I shall
transmit a copy thereof to Congress; and I shall have no objection to your
sending a copy also to Sir Henry Clinton, by way of the headquarters of his
Excellency General Washington, (if his Excellency should approve of it)
together with any just and decent representations which you may think necessary
to make on this occasion or any other, after I have examined such letters; but
as to an officer's going to Sir Henry Clinton, it is altogether unnecessary --
so you will please to excuse my refusal of it.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant, (Signed) W. HEATH, Major General.
P. S. I shall not at this time comment on the indelicate manner in which your
letter is addressed.



Maj. Genesis PHILLIPS.

I, WILLIAM PHILLIPS, Major General and senior officer of the troops under the
restrictions of the Convention of Saratoga, do promise and engage, on my word
and honor, and on the faith of a gentleman, to remain in the quarters now
assigned to me in Cambridge, in the State of Massachusetts Bay, and at no time
to exceed or pass the limits of the gardens and yards adjoining and belonging
to said quarters, except in the road by the nearest and most direct route from
my said quarters to Prospect and Winter Hills, and the limits of said hills
within the chain of sentries -- until it shall be permitted or ordered
otherwise by the Continental General commanding in this State, his Excellency
General Washington, or the Honorable Congress of the United States of America;
and that I will not, directly or indirectly, give any intelligence to the
enemies of the said United States, or either of them, or do or say any thing in
opposition to or in prejudice of the measures and proceedings of any Congress
for the said States, during my continuance here as aforesaid, or until I am
duly exchanged or discharged.

Given under my hand, at Cambridge, this eighteenth day of June, 1778.

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, June 18, 1778. SIR,
YOU will immediately repair to Cambridge, and wait upon Maj. Genesis Phillips:
present him the letter addressed to him. After he has read the letter, present
the parole; if he signs it, well; if he refuses, you will please to inform him,
that in consequence of the indecent, dishonorable, and highly insulting
expressions in his letter of yesterday, against the honor and dignity of the
Free, Sovereign, and Independent States of America, and in prejudice of the
measures and proceedings of the Honorable the Congress -- as it is my duty, so
it is my express orders, that he, the said Maj. Genesis Phillips, be restricted to
the limits of his house, yards and gardens, beyond which he is not to pass,
until it be otherwise ordered; and that you immediately plant and continue by
relief so many sentries, as may be necessary to prevent his exceeding those
limits. You will give orders that the sentries, so planted, observe a strict
decorum and soldier-like behavior, avoiding insult, and behaving with becoming
dignity. After which, you will wait on the next senior officer, and acquaint
him of Genesis Phillips being confined.

I am, Sir, your most obedient servant, (Signed) W. HEATH, Maj. Genesis

Lieut. Col. POLLARD, Dep. Adj. General.

The same day Genesis Phillips wrote our General as follows:

CAMBRIDGE, June 18, 1778, 3 o'clock, P. M. SIR,
LIEUTENANT Brown, of the 21st regiment, who was shot yesterday by an American
sentinel, died about midnight in the last night.

I am informed some person, whom you have sent to examine the body, is now
doing it; and, as I suppose every inspection of that sort will be over by
tomorrow, I would propose to bury the corpse tomorrow evening. I am to desire
to know if you have any objection, and whether you have any particular
intentions relating to the body of the murdered officer. If it is to be allowed
Christian burial, I would wish to deposit it in the vault appropriated for
strangers, in the Protestant church at Cambridge. In this case, I am to desire
you will give the necessary permission for this purpose, and allow a sufficient
number of men from the barracks to assist in carrying down the corpse from the
barracks to the church.

As I am totally ignorant to whom it may be necessary to apply for leave to
open the church, it obliges me to give you this trouble; and I hope, if
permission is granted, that it may be done so fully, as will prevent the
sanguinary people of this country from insulting and treating with indignity
the dead body of the unfortunate officer, who, in their rage, revengeful
tempers, and barbarity, they have put to death.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient humble servant, (Signed) W. PHILLIPS.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

To this letter the following was returned:

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, June 19, 1778. SIR,
Yours of yesterday afternoon was handed to me the last evening; I most
sincerely regret the unfortunate death of Lieut. Brown.

As I apprehend the Coroner has taken his inquisition, or will do it this
morning, which is in conformity to the laws of the land in that case made and
provided, for the sole purpose of investigating the truth of facts -- you not
only have my permission, but request, that every mark of respect may be paid to
the corpse of the deceased; and you have my permission also for such a number
of non-commissioned officers and privates to attend, as may be necessary to
bear the corpse from the funeral house to the place of interment.

I do not know under whose direction the church at Cambridge now is; but I have
given orders to Maj. Hopkins and the Town-Major to afford every kind of
assistance in their power, and to inquire who has the direction, and to obtain
permission. I have also given orders that decency be exhibited by our troops
during the time of procession of interment, which the solemnity of so mournful
an occasion points out as the duty of rational beings; and from the universal
respectful behavior of the people of this country on such occasions, you may
be sure that not the least insult will be offered.

I am, Sir, your most obedient servant, (Signed) W. HEATH.

Maj. Genesis PHILLIPS.

19th. -- Genesis Phillips wrote another letter, as follows:

CAMBRIDGE, June 19th, 1778. SIR,
I SHALL not animadvert upon, or answer any part of your letter of yesterday,
except what relates to your meaning to restrict me to my house, garden and
yards, and to the direct road from my quarters to the quarters of the troops of
the Convention on Prospect and Winter Hills, and requiring my signing a new
parole for my propriety of conduct within those limits.

When by the treaty of Convention of Saratoga the officers were to be admitted
on parole, it was clearly intended that a liberal interpretation was to be
given of that agreement; and, to use your own words, generous limits were to be
granted. I will not deny that the limits have been sufficient.

I apprehend, Sir, that under no sense or explanation of the treaty, the
officers were to be denied intercourse with the soldiers -- indeed, there is an
article particularly on that point; and by restricting me to my quarters,
allowing me only the passage to the barracks by the direct road, you would
certainly have restricted me as you have done several other officers, from whom
you have taken the benefit of their parole, allowing for the distinction of my
rank, having obtained a quarter instead of a barrack: it seemed therefore a
very extraordinary proposal made to me that I should sign a parole under a
restriction which deprived me of any advantage arising from my giving one,
according to the article on that subject in the treaty of Convention of
Saratoga; and on this consideration I refused it.

You have, Sir, made me a prisoner in my quarters, under a guard, and I am
perfectly at ease about it -- shall bear it, Sir, and any other violence of
power which may happen to me, with more patience than you may suppose. I am
very regardless about insults or injuries done me personally -- I feel only,
and then severely, when any are offered to the troops I command.

But, Sir, you attempt at much more than restricting my person; for in a paper
sent me this day, being your instructions to Lieut. Col. Pollard, dated June
18, 1778, you direct him, after he has planted sentinels around my quarters,
that he is to "wait on the next senior officer, and acquaint him of General
Phillips being confined." I am to inform you, Sir, that, bearing the King's
commission, I shall consider myself senior officer of the troops of the
Convention; and every officer of them will obey my orders as far as their
present situation will allow. You may confine my person, but cannot have power
to take from me my military place, nor my connection with the Convention troops
-- it is too extravagant an idea to suppose you capable of: so little can it be
in the power of an individual to deprive me of the commission I hold, that were
these Colonies really acknowledged Independent and Sovereign States, it would
not be in the power of their government to deprive an officer of another nation
of his military commission, how far soever they might stretch and extend their
power over his person. But, Sir, I must be allowed to declare, that until the
Colonies are acknowledged by Great Britain to be Independent Sovereign States,
I cannot view them in any other light than that in which they are considered by
Great Britain.

As you will not allow me to send an officer to Sir Henry Clinton, I must
request to take advantage of your express for sending my report and
representations to him; and I will beg to know when I must send you my letters.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient, humble servant, (Signed) W. PHILLIPS.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

To which the following answer was returned the next day:

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, June. 20, 1778. SIR,
ANOTHER of your favors of yesterday was handed to me this morning. You may be
assured that the reason of my restricting you to your quarters, the day before
yesterday, was personally no agreeable service. Duty to the honor and dignity
of my country, made it indispensably necessary. Apprehending that so great a
restriction from your former limits as I pointed out, might be construed by you
a dissolution of your parole, I thought it necessary and also reasonable that
you should give a new one. I wished that you might retain your quarters, and at
the same time have a free intercourse with the troops who are quartered at a
distance from you; this distance is so considerable that a parole is necessary.
I acknowledge that by the Convention, you are to be admitted on parole, and
this parole is for propriety of conduct under such admittance; but that parole
being forfeited, by misconduct, ceases to be, and confinement in proportion to
the offense, no breach of the Convention, but fully justifiable upon every
principle of reason and justice.

It was never in my idea to take away your commission, or dissolve your
connection with the troops of the Convention; but, while under confinement, your
power of acting might with propriety be suspended, so far as respected the
transacting of public business between myself and you; but personal regard has
prevented my going that length, any further than to notify the next officer of
your confinement.

I do not insist that you, as an officer in the British army, are obliged to
view the Free, Independent and Sovereign States of America, in any other light
than they are acknowledged by the government whose service you are in. But,
under your present situation and circumstances, I do insist that you shall not
openly insult the honor and dignity of these Sovereign States with impunity.

I am, Sir, Your obedient servant, (Signed) W. HEATH, Major General.

Maj. Genesis PHILLIPS.

Middlesex, ss.
AN inquest taken at Cambridge, within the said county of Middlesex, on the
18th of June, A.D. 1778, before Joel Smith, one of the Coroners for the county
aforesaid, upon view of the body of Lieut. Richard Brown, one of the British
officers (Charlestown, in the county aforesaid) then and there being dead, by
oaths of William How, Benjamin Lock, John Brown, Ebenezer Steadman, Samuel
Manning, Nathaniel Austin, Joseph Read, jun. James Hill, Thomas Barret,
Benjamin Barker, Aaron Hill, Isaac Bradish, James Munro, Joseph Johnson, good
and lawful men of Cambridge aforesaid, who being charged and sworn to inquire
for the sake of the government and people of the Massachusetts Bay, when, and
by what means, and how the said Richard Brown came to his death -- upon their
oath do say, that the said Richard Brown was shot with a fire-arm by the
sentinel in Charlestown, near Prospect-Hill, between the hours of five and six,
P. M. on the 17th day of June, A. D. 1778, in attempting to pass the sentinel
with two women, after being properly challenged by said sentinel -- and so came
to death.

JOEL SMITH, Coroner. Nathaniel Austin, Joseph Read, jun. James Hill, Thomas
Barret, Benjamin Barker, Aaron Hill, Isaac Bradish, James Munro, Joseph
Johnson, William How, Benjamin Lock, John Brown, Ebenezer Steadman, Samuel
Manning.

CAMBRIDGE, June 18, 1778.
Extract of a Letter from Major General HEATH to the President of Congress,
dated Headquarters, Boston, June 19, 1778.

SINCE my last, of the 9th instant, I have received the honor of yours of the
23d, by Capt. Nevers.

The day before yesterday, one of our sentinels, posted at the foot of
Prospect-Hill, shot a Lieut. Richard Brown, of the troops of the Convention,
for not stopping when repeatedly challenged, as he was riding out of the lines
with two women. The orders given to the sentinels being not to allow any
officer without side-arms, or non-commissioned officer, private soldier, woman
or child, without a written passport, to pass the chain of sentries.
Immediately upon my receiving the report of the officer's being shot, and that
the sentinel was confined, I gave orders for his being kept so, and notice to
be given to the Coroner of the county of Middlesex, that a Jury of Inquest
might sit on the body for the investigation of the truth of facts; at the same
time I wrote to Maj. Genesis Phillips -- I do myself the honor to enclose copy
thereof, No. 1; a few minutes after, I received a paper from him, No. 2; the
next morning I again wrote him, No. 3; and a parole, No. 4; and gave Col.
Pollard written orders for the delivery thereof, No. 5. Genesis Phillips refusing
to sign the parole, Col. Pollard, in obedience to my orders, restricted him to
the limits therein mentioned, and planted three sentinels around the house and
gardens; in which state matters now remain.


In CONGRESS, July 7, 1778.
Resolved, That Congress approve of Maj. Genesis Heath's conduct respecting Maj.
Genesis Phillips, consequent upon the death of Lieut. Richard Brown, of the troops
of the Convention.

Extract from the Minutes. CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

The whole of the foregoing correspondence was published by order of Congress;
and our General was informed that it was left for him to conduct toward the
British General, as to the continuance of his arrest, as he might judge the
honor of the United States required. Genesis Phillips continuing to exhibit the
same temper, or it rather growing upon him, he was continued in his arrest,
until the troops of the Convention were ordered to be removed to Charlotteville
in Virginia. It has before been observed, that the officers had certain
articles prescribed to them, for their government in quarters, and that these
were drawn into the parole, and subscribed by them. If any abuses took place, a
Court of Inquiry was directed to investigate the complaints, and report to our
General; thus giving the accused officers an opportunity to exculpate their
conduct, if it was in their power; and no officer could wish more than our
General to treat them with generosity and indulgence, as far as was compatible
with good order and discipline. But notwithstanding the fairness of this mode
of procedure, Genesis Phillips forbid the officers appearing before any Court so
appointed; and on the 18th ult. Mr. Bibby, the Deputy-Adjutant. General to the
troops of the Convention, came into a Court of Inquiry, and declared the
following, which, in order to have the whole together, we now retrospect.

Maj. Genesis Phillips will not permit any officer under his command to be brought
before a Court of Inquiry of the American troops, for the purpose of
scrutinizing their conduct; but if any complaints are lodged against any
British officers, and Maj. Genesis Heath shall desire their conduct to be inquired
into, Maj. Genesis Phillips will give such orders as are customary in such cases
among the British troops.

By order of Maj. Genesis Phillips:

(Signed) THOSE. BIBBY, Dep. Adj. Genesis
MONDAY, May 18, 1778.
The same day, Genesis Phillips sent a letter to our General, expressive of the
same sentiments; to which the following answer was sent to him.

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, May 19, 1778. SIR,
YOUR favor of yesterday, came to hand the last evening; and, I must confess,
contained matter novel and surprising to me. What ideas of a copartnership in
command you have entertained, I cannot tell. From the beginning, I have found a
disposition in the senior officer of the Convention, to assume the right and
authority of trying and punishing offenders for breaches of my orders. This I
ever have and ever shall view in no other light than that of insult. As such, I
represented it to his Excellency Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne, whose good sense and
thorough knowledge of discipline, led him, in a letter to me of the 13th Jan.
to yield the matter in the following words: "I do not mean to deny that you
have a right to take justice into your own hands." Indeed it is a subject,
concerning which, having heretofore said and wrote very fully, I shall not at
this time dwell long upon. As to agreement or copartnership in command, it is
absurd. In military command there must be one supreme head; at present, the
Honorable Congress have honored me with the command of this department, and I
imagined that no officer within its limits would dare dispute it.

My orders, as I have repeatedly heretofore declared, shall ever be founded on
the principles of honor, reason and justice, and not to infringe those
delicate principles in others; so I again declare that such my orders shall not
be broken or disputed, by any officer or soldier, placed under my direction,
with impunity. The matter of command is no hidden mystery; the usage and
customs of nations are known. The celebrated Vattel, Puffendorff and Grotius,
with whose writings I dare say you are acquainted, elegantly explain how an
army that submits to another, whether the conditions are more or less honorary
to themselves, are to conduct whilst they remain within the limits of the
victors' camp, or jurisdiction of their country. But I shall not spend time to
reason on a subject which would reflect dishonor on myself to allow even to be
disputed. Therefore, to sum up all in few words -- that, as I am determined to
treat the troops of the Convention with strict justice and generosity, so I am
determined that all offenders against my standing orders of the garrison shall
be brought to proper punishment; that I will not allow the senior officer of
those troops to try or punish for any offense against my orders; and, that the
truth may at all times be properly investigated, I shall, from time to time,
when occasion requires, appoint Courts of Inquiry for that purpose; and such as
presume to dispute or counteract them, I shall duly notice.

I am, etc. (Signed) W. HEATH, Major General.

Maj. Genesis PHILLIPS.

Genesis Phillips finding that he could not get any thing by assault, he next
tried his skill in attempting to sap, with the policy of friendship; he
therefore wrote another letter of the same date, under the name of

"Private."

MONDAY, May 18th, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE, this morning, written to you a letter upon public matters. I will now
assure you, that I am sorry that my earnest desire of preserving a
communication of intelligence, between you and I, does not meet your consent;
and I will lament that you will attend to the sudden reports you receive, so
fully, and act upon them, without that good-humoured attention to me, which I
had hoped and have endeavored should subsist between us. You and I are nearly
of an age -- I will not dispute understandings with you; but I certainly am an
older soldier, and must necessarily know the customs of armies. Allow me to
assure you, the manner with which things are taken up sometimes deviates from
military rule. It is a fixed custom to go from the head, downwards; and, when
an Ensign offends against order, the General does not condescend to altercate
with him, but sends his orders, his desire, or his opinion, to the commanding
officers; and, in your sending messages to young officers, it injures your own
consequence, and certainly hurts mine. Believe me, that I am strict against any
breach of orders, and will never suffer it to pass uncensured. I allow, the two
officers have behaved ill, and I will punish them; but the getting the
countersign was an effect of good humor and simplicity in an American soldier.
Let me once more request of you, to recollect your own situation, and it will
put mine in a clear view to you. Whenever you have reports against any of our
troops, let me know them, and I will give instant attention to them: but you
will, I am sure, immediately feel, that sending a threat to two officers, that
you would send them on board a prison-ship, and never informing me wherefore,
was not strictly conformable to good humor or good discipline.

I am, with a very hearty desire of preserving harmony and order, and with much
personal regard,

Yours, etc. (Signed) W. PHILLIPS.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

To which the following answer was returned:

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, May 19, 1778. SIR,
HAVING, in my other letter of this date, answered yours of yesterday, I now
reply to your favor of the same date, which you are pleased to style
"private." I can assure you, Sir, that no person living wishes to act with good
humor more than I do; or would take more pains to cultivate harmony and a good
understanding. But in the present case, you must not expect that I shall allow
myself, either by frowns or flatteries, to give up the dignity of command
reposed in me.

I wish, I am determined, to extend every act of generosity toward the
officers of the Convention, which is compatible with the safety and honor of
my country. I shall not take up matters suddenly, or proceed rashly, unless
circumstances shall render it unavoidably necessary; and although you may be
possessed of a greater share of understanding than I am, and an older soldier,
-- yet I have endeavored to acquire a knowledge of my duty, and the customs of
armies and nations. I am not conscious of any deviations from those rules or
customs in general adopted by them.

The General who commands is undoubtedly the fountain of power, and all orders
should descend from him through the proper officers, until they are
communicated to the lowest order of the army; and that commander who disputes
with, or threatens young officers, undoubtedly lessens his consequence, and
will soon become contemptible in the eyes of an army. Nothing of this was in
the late transactions, that I know of: having received a report of the conduct
of the two officers, I ordered them to be confined to their quarters, and
appointed a Court of Inquiry to examine into the grounds of the complaint, that
I might have a clear understanding of the affair, and order accordingly. In all
cases where you or the troops of the Convention are immediately corcerned in
the orders, I have always directed that you should be served with a copy. As to
any threatenings being sent to the two officers, of confining them on board a
guard-ship, I know nothing of it.

The main difficulty seems to arise from your apprehension, that you are to try
and punish all offenders against my orders. Here, Sir, notwithstanding your
knowledge and age in soldiery, you much mistake, and cannot support those your
pretensions by any rule or authority, civil or military. The moment you piled
your arms, and marched off the ground, you became subject to the standing
orders of the victor; and in every jurisdiction through which you marched, or
where you remain, are subject to all the orders and laws of the place; and such
as violate them are obnoxious to punishment. The law and custom of nations
explicitly tell us, who are to try and punish: and, although I do not in the
least doubt your ready disposition to inquire into, and even to punish
offenders against my orders -- yet when you attempt it, it is such an indignity
offered to my authority, that you may be assured it ever will raise my
resentment; and if it did not, I am confident that yourself (at least
hereafter) and all military men would despise me for my insensibility. In a
word, Sir, cultivate those principles of obedience to orders among the officers
in your situation, recommended and inculcated by the custom and usage of
nations, and dictated by reason -- and you may depend, that I shall exert
myself to make your situation as agreeable as possible; and you may be also
assured, that I never shall require that of the troops of the Convention,
which, in the opinion of the just and wise in any country, shall reflect
dishonor on them. With the strongest desire to cultivate and maintain harmony,
and to treat you with respect, and with much personal regard,

I am, etc. (Signed) W. HEATH.

Maj. Genesis PHILLIPS.

The same feelings which had great weight in the beginning of the war,
continued for some time, namely, that Great Britain was one of the greatest and
most powerful nations in the world, in arts, and in arms; while the Americans
were yet their Colonies, young, weak, and but barely civilized, ignorant of the
world, and especially so of arts and of arms. Hence we see it so frequently
breaking out, (until experience had taught them a different opinion.) There was
frequently, as in the atmosphere, placid intervals; but whenever any cross wind
happened to blow, (and there is no season or circumstances without them) then
instantly appeared those ideas of self-superiority, and contempt for the
Americans, which was the true cause of many uncomfortable hours. Mankind have
the same passions; the difference lies, in some riding with a double curb,
while others give the reins.

This Convention business was a heavy task for our General, and the whole
subject would form an entertaining volume of itself: we are now circumscribed
by our limits, and have only given a small specimen for mankind to form an
opinion for themselves. In all the letters or conversation which was had on the
occasion, we find scarcely a reflection cast by our General on the British
nation, the cause in which they were engaged, or against any who were
fortunate, or unfortunate; but a uniform desire to make those placed under his
orders as comfortable as circumstances would admit; at the same time, an
unshaken determination, a perseverant watchfulness, with decent language, to
defend the cause and honor of his own country, by arguments supported by the
customs and maxims of the civilized world. The hundreds of letters on file, are
all proofs of this; and in many instances it was politely acknowledged.

The two following letters, of different dates, are some of the specimens. --
Major Harnage had his lady with him.

CAMBRIDGE, October 30th, 1778. SIR,
WITH great pleasure I acknowledge the favor of your obliging letter; and Mrs.
Harnage joins me, with Capt. Hawker, in returning you our sincere thanks for
your kind representation of us, and solicitation in our favor, to the
Honorable Congress.

With your leave, we shall with patience wait the result; and, let the Congress
determine in what manner they please, our obligations to you, Sir, will be ever
acknowledged.

Believe me, Sir, with respect, Your obliged humble servant, HENRY HARNAGE.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

CAMBRIDGE, June 10, 1779. SIR,
BEING this moment informed that you are about to quit Boston, I must beg
leave, previous to your departure, to trouble you with these our
acknowledgments, for the civility and attention you have been pleased to show
us; and to assure you that Mrs. Harnage, Capt. Hawker and myself shall ever
retain a due sense of all favors, by which you have kindly endeavored to
alleviate, and make easy, the restraints and disagreeable circumstances that
unavoidably attend our present situation.

We hope you will mention us to the gentleman who is to succeed to the command
in the Eastern Department.

Wishing you all personal happiness, I remain with respect, Sir,

your most obedient and Obliged humble servant, HENRY HARNAGE.

The Hon. Maj. Genesis HEATH.

29th. -- A Spanish xebeck and a French cutter arrived at Boston, with
dispatches from their respective Courts, which were forwarded to Congress.

30th. -- Certain intelligence was received, that the British had left
Philadelphia.

July 9th. -- Intelligence was received, that a warm action happened on the
28th ult. between Genesis Washington's and Genesis Clinton's armies, near Monmouth
courthouse, in the Jersies. Genesis Clinton, having taken the resolution to move
from Philadelphia to New York, through the Jersies, commenced his movements
accordingly, encumbered with an immense train of stores and baggage, which
occupied some miles in length; and these are the greatest encumbrance to a
General, on a march of danger from an attack of his opponent, to which he can
be exposed.

Genesis Washington was no sooner apprised of this intention and movement of the
British General, than he made his arrangements accordingly, crossed the
Delaware, and pushed detached corpse forward to obstruct the advance, gall the
flanks, and fall on the rear of the enemy, while he moved on with the body of
his army. By the 27th, Genesis Clinton had got on as far as Monmouth, and Genesis
Washington's detached troops were on his flanks, and close on his rear. Here
the British General took a wise resolution, to make a stand with a part of his
best troops, while he pushed on his baggage through the difficult defiles,
under the careful and experienced hand of Genesis Kniphausen.

Genesis Washington, acting with equal skill, and equal bravery, made every
arrangement which the moment called for. On the morning of the 28th, he ordered
Maj. Genesis Lee to attack the enemy's rear, himself moving on briskly to support
him; but to his surprise, as he advanced on, he met Lee's troops retreating and
the enemy impetuously pursuing. Here was Genesis Washington seen in all his
splendour; for this critical situation is the orb in which he shines the
brightest. He rallied the retreating troops: he inspired them by precept and by
example; and the misfortune of the morning was considerably retrieved.

The Americans fought bravely, and so did the British. After hard fighting, in
a most intense hot day, when scores died of the heat, and drinking too freely
of cold water when they could find it, both armies remained on the ground. The
Americans determined to re-commence the action early on the next morning; but
Genesis Clinton, finding that his baggage had struggled pretty well through the
defiles, and had got tolerably well advanced, took the advantage of the cool of
the night to slip off, unperceived by the Americans, and got to ground where he
was safe. Some sharp words took place between Genesis Washington and Maj. Genesis
Lee, as the one advanced and the other retreated, which issued in the arrest,
trial and suspension of the latter. Genesis Washington reported to Congress, that
the Americans buried of the British 4 officers and 245 privates; among the
former, the Hon. Col. Monckton, (who was a brave and experienced officer) and
that there were a few prisoners. The American loss; killed, 1
Lieutenant Colonel, 1 Major, 3 Captains, 2 Lieutenants, 1 Sergeant, 52 rank and
file -- wounded, 2 Colonels, 8 Captains, 4 First-Lieutenants, 2
Second-Lieutenants, 1 Ensign, 1 Adjutant, 8 Sergeants, 1 Drummer, 120 rank and
file -- missing, 5 Sergeants, 126 rank and file; of the artillery, one
First-Lieutenant, 7 Matrosses, and 1 Bombadier were killed -- one Captain, 1
Sergeant, 1 Corporal, 1 Gunner, and 10 Matrosses wounded -- one Matross missing
-- six horses killed, and two wounded. Both Generals undoubtedly have much
credit for their conduct in this action. Genesis Clinton's object being to reach
New York with his baggage, etc. obtained this victory, with the loss which he
sustained. Genesis Washington's conduct was well calculated for victory on his
side; and how far he would have succeeded, had it not been for the misfortune
of the morning, none can tell. This misfortune began by exposing the American
advanced troops, in line, on the side of the field where they were cannonaded
by the British, who at the same time wisely exposed only their artillery to
that of the Americans. It is to be remembered, that men may be led on to action
in the face of a cannonade, before which they will not stand; the point of
decision is in the mind; while advancing, although galled by the fire of their
opponents, the dead and wounded are left behind them as they fall, and the
troops feel an ardour for arriving in a few minutes at a point, where they can
use their own arms, to retaliate for the injury they sustain. But when men are
placed open to the fire of the artillery of their enemy, at such a distance as
to prevent the use of their own arms in their defense, the dead and wounded
fall and lie among them, or are drawn away, and every groan they make is heard.
The troops soon conceive that they are placed as marks to be shot at; while the
greater policy of the enemy keeps their column or line out of the rake of their
cannon; the mind gives way, and retreat will be inevitable. This was
experienced in this instance, and the fairest hopes of a noble onset in a few
minutes blasted; and these were some of the best troops in the army too. It was
here that the firm Col. Wesson had his back peeled of its muscles, almost from
shoulder to shoulder, by a cannon-ball. The confidence of the troops could not
be fully recovered, until they saw the presence of their beloved General.

18th. -- Intelligence was received, that the Count D'Estaing had arrived, with
the fleet under his command, off the Capes of Delaware. The fleet consisted of
12 sail of the line, and 4 frigates. Off the coast of Virginia, they took a
privateer, fitted out of New York, of 26 guns -- a ship, bound from New
Providence to London -- re-captured a French snow laden with dry goods, and
drove a British ship of war on shore.

19th. -- Intelligence was received, that about 2,000 men, said to be invalids,
had arrived at Rhode Island from New York.

21st. -- Intelligence was received, that a body o^ refugees and Indians had
destroyed the town of Wyoming, on the Susquehannah, and butchered many of the
inhabitants. The same day, it was learnt, that Genesis Washington had crossed
Hudson's River with the main army, except Genesis Wayne's brigade -- that Count
D'Estaing had appeared off Sandy Hook -- that the inhabitants of New York were
in great consternation, and that the Marquis de la Fayette, with Glover's and
Varnum's brigades, were on their march for Providence.

The British were very busy in fortifying Rhode Island.

25th and 26th. -- Sent for Providence 43,000 flints, five tons hard bread, a
quantity of dry fish, etc. and sent a large number of the large flat-bottomed
boats to Weymouth; they were to be conveyed, taking the advantage of the river,
to the vicinity of Rhode Island. Half of Col. Craft's regiment of State
artillery were ordered to Tiverton; the other half of the regiment of
artillery, and a draft from the militia, to the number of 3000 men, including
1000 before ordered, were to march and reinforce Maj. Genesis Sullivan in the
State of Rhode Island. On the 29th, at noon, the Count D'Estaing's squadron
came to anchor off Point Judith, and at evening stretched a line from that
Point to Secunnet.

31st. -- The regiment of State artillery, with 6 brass 4-pounders, and 2 brass
howitzers, marched for Tiverton; and the next day the marine mortar was sent
on, slung under two pair of stout cart-wheels. The British sloop of war,
Kingfisher, a row-galley and a sloop, stationed near Secunnet, upon the
approach of a French frigate, were run on shore by their own crews, set on
fire, and left to burn and blow up. Maj. Bumstead's company of Boston
artillery, with two brass fieldpieces, and Lieut. Dunnel, with a detachment of
the Continental artillery, with two fieldpieces, marched for Rhode- Island,
and the militia and volunteers were on their march that way; and large
quantities o^ military stores and provisions were going from hence.

August 10th. -- Major General Hancock, with his suit, went for Rhode Island,
to take the command of the militia. The same morning, Genesis Sullivan made a
landing on the island, without opposition. About the same time, the Count
D'Estaing, with his squadron, passed the British batteries at Newport, when
there was a brisk cannonade on both sides. Many of the shot struck in the town,
and the inhabitants were in much consternation, not knowing in what place they
were safe. A shot entered the door of the house of Mrs. Mason, a widow lady, a
little above the floor: as the family were passing from room to room, not
knowing where the next shot might strike, young Mr. Mason, passing through the
entry, found the black man of the family sitting with his back against the
shot-hole in the door; on being asked why he sat there, he answered, "Master,
you never know two shot to go in the same place." Under this idea he was
tranquil. Lord Howe's fleet appeared in the Offing, consisting of 8 sail of the
line, and 12 frigates.

11th. -- The Count came to sail, and stood out, and the British fleet stood
off -- the wind very fresh.

13th. -- A most severe storm of wind and rain, which stripped many trees of
their fruit, and tore others up by the roots, etc.

The troops on Rhode Island, under the command of Genesis Sullivan, were on the
11th, 10, 122, including officers, exclusive of some volunteers from
New Hampshire, and other corpse, arranged as follows:

Varnum's brigade, including officers,1,037 Glover's,1,131 Cornell's,1,719
Greene's,1,626 Lovell's,1,158 Titcomb's957 Livingston's advance,659 West's
reserve,1,025 Artillery,810 Total,10,122


These were encamped at and near Quaker-Hill. The storm destroyed a great
number of cartridges, owing to the badness of the boxes. A fresh supply was
sent on from Boston.

15th. -- The army advanced, and in the afternoon arrived within two miles of
the enemy, without the least opposition. Genesis Washington with the main army,
was at the White Plains, in the State of New York, said to be about 20,000
strong. Seventeen transports with troops from Genesis Howe's army at New York,
failed for Rhode Island; but finding the French squadron in the way, could not
come to the place.

On the evening of the 16th, Genesis Sullivan took possession of some high grounds
which commanded the enemy's works on their right, and was not discovered until
morning, when they began to cannonade the Americans, but did them no damage,
which was continued the next day without injury.

On the night of the 17th, the covered way was nearly completed, and also two
batteries of cannon. The enemy fired 300 or 400 shot, but did no other damage
than slightly wounding two men.

19th. -- The American works were advanced nearer to the enemy, and on the
20th, they had one man killed and two wounded by the enemy's cannon. In the
afternoon the Count D'Estaing returned to Newport -- his own ship, the
Languedoc, was totally dismasted in the storm, and lost her rudder. In this
situation, an English 50 gun ship of Lord Howe's squadron, came across her, and
got under her stern, where she did the Languedoc some small damage; but on
wearing the Languedoc, so as to bring some of her heavy metal to bear, the
Englishman bore away. The Marseilles, a 74, lost her foremast in the storm, and
the Caesar, a 74, parted from the squadron.

22d. -- In the afternoon, the Caesar came to anchor in the light-house channel,
(Boston lower harbor.) After parting from the squadron in the storm, she fell
in with a British 50 gun ship, with whom she was engaged for near three
glasses, and would have taken her, had not some other English ships hove in
fight. The Caesar had 160 men killed and wounded, about 60 of which were of the
former; and the Captain among the latter, who lost an arm. On his being brought
up to Boston, our General immediately paid him a visit, and expressed to him
his regret for the arm he had lost; to which the Captain replied, although very
weak through the great loss of blood he had sustained -- that he was ready to
lose his other arm in the cause of the Americans. Remember this, ye Americans,
in future times!

The same day, the enemy threw 2 or 300 shells at our troops on Rhode Island;
two men only were wounded, and the fire briskly returned. The Count D'Estaing
determined to come round with his squadron to Boston, and Genesis Sullivan must
retreat to the north end of the island.

26th. -- Maj. Genesis Hancock returned to Boston. The volunteers were coming home.

On the morning of the 28th, the Count D'Estaing, with his squadron, arrived in
Nantasket Road, and the next day the Count came up to town.

On the 29th, there was a smart action between the British and Americans,
toward the north end of Rhode Island, which terminated in favor of the
latter. The most severe part of this action was at the hollow between
Butt's-Hill and Quaker-Hill, a ground situated for slaughter on both sides,
rather than for decisive victory on either. Col. Jackson's regiment of
continental troops, and Genesis Lovell's brigade of militia, are said to have
distinguished themselves; and the artillery drove off two frigates that
attempted to cover the enemy's flank. The Americans had about 60 men killed,
and 180 wounded. The loss of the enemy unknown.

On the evening of the 30th, Genesis Sullivan left the island; and on the morning
of the 31st, an express from Plymouth brought intelligence that 20 sail of
topsail vessels were seen off that place the evening before -- some of them
very large ships. In consequence of this intelligence, our General, the
President of the Council, Genesis Hancock, and others, went down the harbor, to
confer with the Count D'Estaing.

The next day, September 1st, the Count came up to town, with a number of his
officers, and was to dine with our General. Just as the company were going to
sit down, the signal guns announced the appearance of the fleet, and which were
visible from the town, (Mr. John Cutler having discovered them from the steeple
of the Old South meeting house) appearing to be about 20 sail, eight of which
at least were two deckers. The Count immediately put off for the squadron.
Several of the islands next to the road had been fortified, and the squadron
moored, in order to give a warm reception to the British, should they attempt
to enter the road. A number of regiments of the militia of the vicinity, were
ordered to march immediately to the Castle, Dorchester Heights, Boston,
Noddle's Island, etc. Several signal guns were heard in the bay the latter part
of the night, and the next morning the fleet was out of sight. The militia
which were coming in were countermanded. Admiral Byron's squadron arrived a few
days before, at Sandy Hook. The enemy made a descent on New-Bedford, and did
considerable damage: they also made a demand on the inhabitants of Martha's
Vineyard, for a large number of cattle, sheep, etc.

9th. -- An affray happened in Boston between some American and French sailors;
two French officers in attempting to part them, were much wounded -- one of
them, a Major of the fleet, died of the wounds on the 15th.

Brigadier-General Speckt, the eldest Brigadier of the Hessian troops under the
Convention, wrote a letter to our General, in which he informed him, that,
being advanced in age, he had but little taste for those pleasures and
amusements which please the young and gay; but he had not lost his taste for
sporting with his gun, and requested that he might do it within the limits of
his parole. Nothing could be more pleasing to our General, than to gratify this
brave veteran soldier; he therefore wrote him the following answer.

HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, Sept. 10th, 1778. SIR,
YOUR letter of the 9th inst. came safe to hand. The frequent informations
which I have received of your civil and polite behavior, since you have been
at Cambridge, and your taste for little diversion except shooting, leads me to
grant you every indulgence which is compatible with my duty, and the honor and
safety of my country. You therefore have my permission to go a shooting within
the limits assigned you, attended by one servant; and hope the amusement will
equal your expectation.

I am, etc. (Signed) W. HEATH.

Brig. Genesis SPECKT.

17th. -- The General Assembly ordered 1,200 men to be detached from the
militia, and marched to Boston immediately; and on the 19th, ordered one-third
part of their train-band to be immediately detached for the purpose of
completing the works in and about the town of Boston -- garrisoning the works,
etc. Our General went on board the Count's ship, and with him to view the works
on George's Island.

22d. -- The Count D'Estaing, with the officers of his squadron, made a public
appearance in town -- were received by a Committee of both Houses of the
General Assembly, at their landing -- breaksasted at Genesis Hancock's -- took
punch and wine at Headquarters, at twelve o'clock; and then returned to the
fleet, under a salute on leaving the town, and on passing the Castle.

The grand army under Genesis Washington took a new position; one division under
the immediate command of Genesis Putnam, at Fishkill; one under Genesis de Calb, at
Fredericksburg; and one under Genesis Gates, at Danbury.

24th. -- The General Assembly countermanded their orders for calling out one
third part of their train-band, and ordered that they be held in readiness to
march on the shortest notice, wherever occasion shall require.

25th. -- The General Assembly made a public dinner for the Count D'Estaing,
etc. etc. The next day, the Count D'Estaing, Marquis de la Fayette, and a
number of other officers and gentlemen, dined with our General.

October 5th. -- The British destroyed the salt-works and several stores, and
did other damage, at Egg. Harbor; they also surprised a part of Polaski's
legion in that neighborhood, whom they handled very severely. The British
pretended that they had heard that Polaski had instructed his men not to give
them quarter; they therefore anticipated retaliation. About the same time,
Baylor's dragoons were surprised at Tappan, and treated much in the same
manner. Nocturnal enterprises, in which the bayonet is principally made use of,
are generally uncommonly bloody.

The Languedoc, the Count's ship, having been completely repaired, fell down to
Nantasket Road, and joined the squadron.

6th. -- Genesis du Portail, the Chief Engineer of the American army, came to
Boston to survey the several works, in order to their being repaired or
augmented, as might appear necessary; and fatigue parties were employed on the
different works, and every thing put in the best posture of defense.

20th. -- Our General, in company with the Count D'Estaing and others, went to
Nantasket, to take a view of the works there, and to review a battalion of
marines, who maneuvered well, and in every particular were well disciplined,
owing to the unwearied attention of their Major, M'Donald, a Scotchman, whose
father was in the rebellion in England, and with this son fled to France for
safety. Genesis Bouganville had the command at Nantasket; he was also commander of
one of the first ships in the fleet under the Count D'Estaing. The enemy left
the Jersies, and prepared to embark a large body of troops. About 100 sail of
shipping, including men-of-war, fell down to the Hook on the 17th of October.
On the 19th and 20th, the fleet sailed from Sandy Hook; the first division
consisted of upwards of 120 sail, of which 15 were of the line, and 10 or 12
frigates. This fleet went to the West Indies, with about 4,000 troops. The
second division, about 30 sail, of which 2 were of 50 guns, and 2 frigates.
They stood to the eastward; there was but few troops on board the latter. Six
brigades of the Continental army were on their march for Hartford, in
Connecticut, to be ready to move this way, should the enemy appear in this
quarter; and Maj. Genesis Gates was ordered to take the command in the Eastern
Department.

November 4th. -- In the morning the Count D'Estaing's squadron sailed from
Nantasket Road.

6th. -- Maj. Genesis Gates, with his lady, suite, etc. arrived at Boston. The
Somerset, British man-of-war, of 64 guns, run ashore on Cape Cod, and was
taken possession of by the militia, who sent the crew prisoners to Boston.

7th. -- Maj. Genesis Gates took the command at Boston. In the next Continental
Journal, printed by John Gill, the following made its appearance:

BOSTON, Nov. 12.
ON Thursday last, arrived in town, from Hartford, the Hon. Horatio Gates, Esquire
Major General in the army of the United States, being appointed by Congress to
the chief command in the Eastern District, in the room of the Hon.
Major General Heath.

While we receive, with the highest pleasure, a General justly celebrated for
his personal virtues and martial achievements, we cannot but pay a due tribute
of respect to one, whose accomplishments as a citizen, a gentleman, and an
officer, have shone so conspicuously in the delicacy, propriety, and dignity of
his private and public conduct, through the whole of his command in this
department.

Tenacious of the civil rights of the community, and of the honor and safety
of these Free, Sovereign and Independent States, so far as they were entrusted
to his protection, in the most interesting and critical circumstances in which
a General could possibly be placed, he has uniformly exhibited a prudence,
animation, decision and firmness, which have done him honor, and fully
justified the confidence reposed in him.

The cordial and most explicit approbation of the army, the inhabitants of this
town, the army and navy of our illustrious ally, the Government of this State,
his Excellency the Commander in Chief, and of Congress, added to the
consciousness of his having discharged his trust with fidelity -- must, in a
great measure, have alleviated the fatigues incident to his arduous station,
and compensated the loss of his health, so much impaired by an incessant
attention to business.

The very polite and affectionate terms in which he has taken leave of the
department, in his last general orders, demand also our most grateful
acknowledgments.

10th and 11th. -- The Convention troops marched for Virginia. They were
marched to Connecticut, and delivered to the orders of Gov. Trumbull; and were
in like manner to be conveyed from State to State, each furnishing an escort,
wagons, etc. until they reached Virginia. Genesis Sir Henry Clinton, having
refused to give passports to American vessels to bring to Boston provisions for
the use of the Convention troops, or otherwise supplying of them, Congress on
the 15th of October, passed a resolve that the troops of the Convention should
be removed to Charlotteville in Virginia, and they were now moving accordingly.

24th. -- It was learnt, that the brigades which marched from the American
grand army to Hartford, marched back to Danbury. In this month, Col. Alden, of
one of the Massachusetts regiments, with his clerk, were surprised and killed
by the tories and Indians, at Cherry Valley, in the State of New York. The
regiment defended the place, and repulsed the enemy. The American army went
into winter quarters in the Jersies, at Danbury, Peek's Kill, etc. Capt.
Hallet, on the 23d, on George's Bank, latitude 41 40 north, in 18 fathoms
water, discovered a mast 10 or 12 feet above water; upon a close examination,
supposed it to be the topmast of a 74 gun ship of Admiral Byron's squadron,
which foundered in the storm, when the Somerset ran on shore.

December 19th. -- It was learnt that the small armed vessels of the enemy did
considerable damage to the inhabitants along the eastern coast of
Massachusetts, by plundering, taking their coasting vessels, etc. A little
before this time, Colonel Joseph Ward, Muster-Master-General, and Lieut. Col.
Bradford, were taken by a gang of refugees, in the Jersies, and carried to
New York.

27th. -- Our General received letters from Admiral Gambice, respecting the
prisoners taken from the Somerset man-of-war, and proposing an immediate
exchange; the letters couched in very polite terms.

28th. -- A waggoner, his horse and four oxen were found frozen to death near
the dyke, on Boston neck; they perished in the severe cold storm on the
preceding Saturday evening.

A more particular account from Cherry Valley stated, that there were 32
persons killed, beside Col. Alden, and 10 rank and file belonging to the
Continental army, and about 30 other persons taken prisoners; 32 houses, 31
barns, one grist-mill, fulling-mill, and blacksmith's shop, burnt. The enemy
consisted of 200 refugees, and 443 Indians, commanded by Joseph Brandt, Walter
Butler, and the Seneca Chief.

In the late storm, the General Arnold privateer drove on shore near Plymouth,
and bilged; 80 of the crew perished; the survivors were much frost bitten.

1779. January 6th. -- The Marquis de la Fayette, and Captain Raimondis, of the
Caesar, French man-of-war, who was wounded and left at Boston, sailed for France
in the Alliance frigate.

8th. -- Capt. Mowatt, with his steet of picaroons, were still infesting the
eastern harbors; they had already captured about 60 sail of vessels, inward
and outward bound, and burnt several houses, etc.

Congress had passed a resolution for calling in the whole emission of
Continental bills of May 20th, 1777, and April 11th, 1778, for which the
possessors were to receive loan certificates, or new emission bills.

21st. -- It was learnt, that the enemy had made an irruption into the State of
Georgia, and were in possession of Sunbury. Their force, at first about 500,
was said to have increased to upwards of 1000.

The British ship which foundered on George's Bank, and whose masts were
discovered by Capt. Hallett, was supposed to be the Cornwall, of 74 guns. It is
said her whole crew were lost.

February 3d. -- It was learnt, that the Count D'Estaing, on his arrival in the
West Indies, made an attack on the British in the island of St. Lucia, but was
defeated with considerable loss, after which he returned to Martinico.

9th. -- It was learnt, that a number of Americans, confined in Gosport prison,
in England, among whom was Doctor Downer of Roxbury, made their escape in the
preceding Sept. by sapping with great address from the prison under the yard
and fence, to the distance of 20 feet, daily concealing the earth which they
dug, in the chimney of the prison. This Doctor Downer is the person mentioned
to have killed a British soldier in single combat, on the 19th of April, in the
battle of Lexington.

11th. -- Intelligence was received, that the British troops had made
themselves masters of Savannah in Georgia. Their light-infantry having stole a
march upon the Americans, by a pass through a swamp, which was supposed
impassable, and thereby defeated our army, under the command of General Robert
How. The American loss was said to be about 30 officers, and near 400 men,
killed, wounded and taken prisoners. This event threw the whole State of
Georgia into the hands of the British. The American General was accused of
misconduct, and a long time after brought to trial, and honorably acquitted.
The British here practiced art, and force was obliged to yield to it. Their
light infantry finding their way through the path in the swamp, bringing of
them on the flank and in the rear of the Americans, where they were not
expected, or not guarded against, proved their overthrow. A few shots on the
flank or rear of an enemy, serves to disconcert them more than a heavy fire in
the front. The point of decision here lies not in the force, but in the mind. A
company of 50 men cannot fire more shots in the same given time on the flank,
or in the rear, than they could in the front; but these few shots will have
more effect on the minds of the enemy, than the fire of a whole regiment in
their front. The Americans were vastly inferior in numbers to the British, and
must at any rate have been forced from the ground; but the British
light-infantry passing through the swamp, was the first misfortune.

The Continental currency was now greatly depreciated. Provisions very scarce
and dear, flour especially so, and many families in Boston almost destitute of
this necessary article.

26th. -- The following resolution of Congress was published in the Boston
newspapers:

In CONGRESS, October 8th, 1778.
Resolved, That all limitations of prices of gold or silver, be taken off.

27th. -- It was learnt, that the Supreme Executive Council of the State of
Pennsylvania had exhibited a number of charges against Maj. Genesis Arnold, while
in command at Philadelphia.

March 7th. -- Intelligence was received that Genesis Tryon had lately made an
excursion to Horseneck, in Connecticut, where he burnt three small vessels,
destroyed all the salt-works, and one store; plundered the inhabitants of their
clothing, etc. and carried off about 200 cattle and horses, and some small
stock. The party consisted of about 600 light horse, light-infantry, rangers,
etc. The enemy got off with the loss of 2 men killed and 20 made prisoners;
giving out that their party was the advance of a body of 3 or 4000, they
deceived the militia, and so escaped a severe drubbing.

11th. -- It was learnt, that on the 25th ult. the British made an excursion
from Staten Island, with intent to surprise General Maxwell, who was stationed
with his brigade at Elizabeth-Town, in the Jersies. They landed at the point a
little before daybreak, and in such superior force as obliged the General to
abandon the town, which he effected without loss. The enemy burnt the General's
quarters, the barns, and a store or two, and then returned.

29th. -- Intelligence was received, that General Washington had issued a
proclamation, offering a pardon to all deserters from the army of the United
States, who should return to their duty by the first day of May following; and
also called upon all absent officers to join their respective corpse by that
time.

Maj. Genesis Sullivan was ordered from Providence to the main army, and Maj. Genesis
Gates to the command at Providence.

Capt. Mowatt again made his appearance on the eastern coast; he had landed
some men, and burnt Mr. Shaw's house.

Intelligence was received, that the British had gained an advantage on the
borders of Georgia, near Briar Creek. Col. Elbert, with a number of others,
were taken prisoners. Matters did not wear a favorable aspect in that quarter;
but it was hoped that Genesis Lincoln, who had now got the command, would give a
new complexion to things at the southward.

April 2d. -- Maj. Genesis Gates left Boston for Providence; in consequence of
which, the command again devolved on our General.

11th. -- It was learnt, that a fleet of refugee cruizers made an attempt to
land a number of men near Falmouth, (Cape-Cod) but were repulsed by the
militia. They next proceeded to Nantucket, where they plundered the inhabitants
of goods and effects. Edward Winslow, formerly of Marshfield, was said to be
commander, with George Leonard, and others.

16th. -- The Continental frigates, Warren, Ranger, and Queen of France, had
been very successful in a cruize, having taken seven or eight prizes going from
New York to Georgia: they were now coming in; among them the Jason, of 20 guns
and 150 men; and Maria, of 16 guns -- four field and about twenty commissioned
officers, were on board. A large number of accountrements for dragoons, dry
goods to the amount of L100,000, and it was said a sum in specie -- a large
quantity of flour, etc.

A great uneasiness prevailed in the army at Providence, on account of the
scarcity of flour. Relief was sent on.

May 3d. -- Capt. Farnald, of New Hampshire, was unfortunately shot in the
breast, as he was standing on Hancock's wharf, by a musket-ball discharged from
the Warren frigate.

7th. -- Intelligence was received that Col. Vanscaak, of the New York line,
with about 500 men, had lately made an excursion to Onondago, surprised the
castle, killed 12 Indians, and took 34 prisoners; destroyed their castle,
cattle, provisions, etc. without the loss of a man.

11th. -- Several vessels laden with rice, on account of the United States,
arrived at Boston, from the southward, which was a great relief to the troops.

An embarkation of troops had sailed from New York, under the command of Genesis
Matthews, convoyed by the ships under the command of Sir George Collier. They
entered the Capes of Virginia, on the 8th. The 9th or 10th they took possession
of a fort at the entrance of Elizabeth River, on the west side. They destroyed
a number of vessels, stores, provisions, etc. and returned.

30th. -- Sir Henry Clinton moved up the Hudson, with a large body of troops,
covered by Sir George Collier's naval force, which had just returned from
Virginia. The intention of Sir Henry Clinton was to seize the posts at King's
Ferry.

31st. -- Genesis Vaughan, with the troops under his command, landed on the east
side of the river, a few miles below Verplanks; and Genesis Sir Henry Clinton on
the west side, a little below Stoney-Point. They soon got possession of both
the points, and immediately rendered them more defensible.

June 4th. -- Our General received orders from Genesis Washington to join the main
army. He had before ordered all the heavy cannon at Boston and Providence,
belonging to the United States, to be sent on to Hudson's River; they were sent
on, slung under two pair of stout cart-wheels each, and were a ponderous load.

Our General received polite and affectionate addresses, on his leaving the
department, from the officers of the line -- staff department -- the officers
of the Boston regiment of militia, etc.

On the 11th, he left Boston, accompanied by a large and respectable number of
officers and citizens, in carriages and on horseback, as far as Watertown,
where the gentlemen had ordered an elegant dinner to be provided. After having
dined, he took his leave, amidst a shout of hearty wishes for his health and
prosperity.

14th. -- He reached Springfield -- was met some distance out of town, by Col.
Armand's dragoons, and the officers of the Springfield department; and, on
entering the town, was received by the infantry of the legion, and a salute of
cannon from the park. Here he quitted the extent of his late eastern command.
He was escorted out of town by the officers of the several military
departments, and Armand's dragoons.

21st. -- He arrived at New-Windsor; and on the 22d, attended Genesis Washington
to West-Point.

23d. -- Our General took the command of the troops on the east side of the
Hudson, having in front all the out-posts toward New York, on that side of the
river. The British were now in possession of both the points at King's Ferry;
and a number of transports had lain in the river for some time. The advanced
posts of the Americans at this time, on this side, did not extend lower than
Peek's Kill; and a picket mounted every night at the south foot of Sugar Loaf
Hill.

On the morning of the 24th, about 200 of the enemy's light horse came up as
far as Crom-Pond -- surprised two militia pickets -- killed and took prisoners
about 30 men. About 130 light-infantry of the enemy, at the same time, came out
from Verplank's Point, made an excursion round, and then returned.

On the morning of the 25th, the enemy's light horse, and about 1000 infantry,
were at Pine's Bridge. Our General ordered 200 light-infantry, under the
command of Lieut. Col. Grosvenor, to march to Robinson's stores, near
Marpoach-Pond, to cover that quarter.

27th. -- A deserter came in from Verplank's Point, who reported that the
British army, except five or six regiments, were to leave the Points, and were
then embarking. Soon after, upwards of 30 sail of transports were seen,
standing down the river. The British had a sloop at anchor off Peek's Kill
landing, and a ship off the Dunderberg. Lest the enemy meant a deception, the
Americans were ordered to lie on their arms, and a regiment extra was ordered
to advance on the heights.

28th. -- Three deserters, one a Hessian musician with his horn, came in from
the enemy; they confirmed the testimony of the former deserter, that the body
of the British army had left the Points.

29th. -- Moylan's horse crossed the river, to reinforce the left; they were to
be followed by Armand's legion. At evening a deserter came in from the enemy. A
detachment from the British at Rhode Island arrived at New York.

Congress, by ballot, chose our General a Commissioner of the Board of War;
which was communicated to him by a letter from his Excellency the President,
which he received on the 30th, as follows:

PHILADELPHIA, June 24th, 1779. SIR,
I HAVE the pleasure of transmitting to you, enclosed, an extract from the
minutes of Congress, of the 22d ult. by which you will perceive that you are
elected to the place of a Commissioner to the Board of War.

I have the honor to be, etc. (Signed) JOHN JAY, President.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.
In CONGRESS, May 22d, 1779.
Congress proceed to the election of a Commissioner for the Board of War, and
the ballots being taken, Maj. Genesis W. Heath was elected.

Extract from the Minutes. (Signed) C. THOMSON, Secretary.




Although this appointment was, in its nature, very honorable, with a salary
proportionate, (4,000 dollars per annum) and our General was informed that he
would also retain his rank in the army, he absolutely declined an acceptance of
it; expressing, in a letter to his Excellency the President, the high sense he
entertained of the honor done him by the appointment; yet, that he chose
rather to participate in the more active operations of the field.

July 1st. -- Genesis Huntington's brigade moved down, and took post at the gorge
of the mountains, near the Continental Village. A deserter came in from the
enemy.

2d. -- Col. Rufus Putnam reconnoitred the enemy's positions at Verplank's and
Stoney Points. At evening a deserter came in from the enemy.

About 360 of the enemy's light horse, and light-infantry, came out from
Mile-Square, and attacked Col. Sheldon's light horse, who were posted at
Poundridge, about 90 in number. The superior force of the enemy obliged our
horse, at first, to retreat; but, being reinforced by the militia, they, in
turn, pursued the enemy. Our loss was one Corporal, one Trumpeter, and eight
privates, wounded: three Sergeants, one Corporal, and four privates missing;
and 12 horses missing. The standard of the regiment being left in the house
when the dragoons suddenly turned out, was lost. Of the enemy, one was killed,
four taken prisoners, four horses taken, and one horse killed. The enemy set
fire to and burnt the meeting house and Maj. Lockwood's house; they also burnt
Mr. Hay's house, at Bedford.

The 5th was an excessive hot day, with a thunder shower; the lightning struck
in the encampment of Col. Putnam's regiment, on Constitution Island, by which
one man was killed; several received much hurt, and a large number were stunned.

The enemy entered the Sound -- landed, and took possession of New Haven --
plundered and insulted the inhabitants, and left the place.

7th. -- The enemy landed at Fairfield, and burnt many houses, etc.

10th. -- About 6 o'clock, P. M. our General received orders from Genesis
Washington, to march, with the two Connecticut brigades, by the way of Crom
Pond, toward Bedford. The next morning, although rainy, the first brigade
marched to the Village.

12th. -- The storm ceasing, the tents (although as wet as water could make
them) were struck, and the troops took up their line of march, reaching Amiwalk
about sunsetting. A report having been spread in the fore part of the day,
that the enemy were at or near Pine's Bridge, our General ordered the
baggage-waggons, under proper escort, to file off to the left, and pursue a
road running parallel with the one on which the column was moving, thereby
keeping the column between the enemy and the wagons. Both arrived on the
ground of encampment within a few minutes of each other. The troops lay on
their arms, without pitching their tents. The enemy continued their
depredations at the Sound, and burnt some houses at Norwalk.

13th. -- At 5 o'clock, A. M. the troops took up their line of march, and
reached Ridgefield, where they halted for the night. The next morning, our
General sent off all the tents and other baggage to Danbury, and took up his
line of march toward Stamford. When he ascended the high grounds in sight of
the Sound, the enemy's fleet was observed under sail, standing off and on
between Stamford and Long Island. About 12 o'clock, two deserters from Genesis
Clinton's army came to our troops; they had left the British army two or three
hours before, at which time the enemy were on the point of making a movement;
the corpse of guides and pioneers being then assembled at Genesis Clinton's
quarters. This called for the exercise of discretion. The troops on board the
transports, with Genesis Tryon, if the whole should land, were far inferior to the
force with our General; but the main British army, with General Clinton, was by
far superior to his. If the whole of the Americans had marched down to
Stamford, Clinton, by five or six hours forced marching, might have crossed his
rear, and have cut him off from a communication with the Highlands; he
therefore resolved to march forward to the Cross Roads, one of which went
directly to the British army, another to Stamford, and in his rear to the
Highlands. Here he took a position in order of battle, and detached Col.
Starr's and Meig^'s r^^^ments, with one field-piece, to Stamford, whose
^^proach toward the town, in open view, would prevent Tryon from landing; or,
in case he did with superior force, the detachment might be surrounded In this
situation the troops remained until dusk, and then took a more advantageous
position for the night, the whole lying on their arms, in order of battle.
Early on the morning of the 15th, our General received information that the
shipping had gone down toward New York; he therefore moved and took a strong
position, between Ridgefield and Bedford, sending out patroles of horse and
foot, on all the roads. This movement toward the Sound, quieted the minds of
the people, and saved Stamford and other towns from destruction.

While the attention of both the grand armies, and of the adjacent country, was
turned toward the Sound, the Great WASHINGTON ordered General Wayne to strike
at Stoney Point, with the light-infantry, which lay not far distant from that
post. This was done with great promptitude, the works being carried by assault,
and the whole garrison made prisoners of war, with all the artillery,
ammunition, stores, etc. This was a most brilliant affair.

In advancing to the assault, the front of the American column led, with
unloaded arms, relying solely on the use of the bayonet. As they approached the
works, a soldier insisted on loading his piece -- all was now a profound
silence -- the officer, commanding the platoon, ordered him to keep on; the
soldier observed that he did not understand attacking with his piece unloaded;
he was ordered not to stop, at his peril; he still persisted, and the officer
instantly dispatched him. A circumstance like this, shocks the feelings; but it
must be considered how fatal the consequence would have been, if one single gun
had been fired; scores would have lost their lives, and most probably defeat
have been consequent; and therefore this was the lesser evil.

On the morning of the 16th, signal guns were heard in the Sound, toward
New York, at intervals, from two o'clock until daylight. Genesis Clinton's army
moved to Mile-Square.

Stoney Point having been taken, with so much eclat to the American arms, Genesis
Washington determined an attempt on Verplank's Point, on the east side of the
Hudson and opposite to Stoney Point: for this purpose Maj. Genesis How, with two
brigades and some 12-pounders on traveling carriages, was ordered to proceed
by the way of Peek's Kill, throw a bridge over the creek, move on to the point,
and open batteries against the enemy's works, while a cannonade and bombardment
was kept up across the river from Stoney Point.

17th. -- At about 10 o'clock, A. M. our General, while out reconnoitring,
received, by an express from Genesis Washington, orders to move as expeditiously
as possible to Peek's Kill, where he would find Genesis How with two brigades.
Our General was to take the command of the whole, and carry into effect the
orders which had been given to Genesis How. Our General returned immediately to
the troops, and at 12 o'clock began his march toward Peek's Kill -- marched
until dusk 15 miles, when the troops halted and laid down to rest on the side
of the road; the dragoons not unsaddling their horses. At 3 o'clock the next
morning, the troops resumed their march, and in the afternoon our General
received information from Genesis How, by express, that Genesis Clinton was on full
march with his whole army toward Verplank's Point: an answer was returned, at
what point the troops then were, and that they were marching as fast as the men
could endure, and would continue so until they reached him. When the troops had
advanced a little to the westward of Drake's farm, Col. Movian came up from
Genesis How, with information that a part of Clinton's army were then above the
New Bridge on Croten river, pushing for the point; and that he w^^ retreating
from the point as fast as possible. On this, our General ordered Genesis
Huntington, with his brigade and two fieldpieces, to push forward as fast as
the troops could march and keep in breath, and take a position on the high
ground, to the south of Peek's Kill, which commands the road to the point, and
also that to the New Bridge, on Croten river; and ordered a regiment to file
off to the right, and secure the pass over the hills between Drake's and Peek's
Kill, and also ordered the flank-guard on the left to be reinforced, and to
send out small flankguards still further from its flank. The troops moving on
with the utmost expedition to the ground which Genesis Huntington had been ordered
forward to secure. Every moment that passed, was expected to announce the
commencement of an action between the advanced or flanking parties of the two
armies, but it did not take place. At this moment, Genesis Washington, having
learnt how matters stood, and that possibly Genesis Clinton might attempt to push
into the Highlands, sent an express to our General, to move into the Highlands
immediately, which was done just after dark, the troops passing the night on
Bald Hill. It was generally the opinion, that if our General had not been at
hand to advance in the manner he did, that Genesis Clinton, by a forced march of
his light troops, backed by his army, would have got in the rear of Genesis How,
before he could have possibly gained the road at Peek's Kill, and between his
army and a sally from the garrison of Verplank's Point inevitably cut off the
whole. Our troops at Stoney Point cannonaded and bombarded the enemy's works at
Verplank's during (...) whole day, and until near midnight. The post (...)
evacuated, and the Washington galley was (...) up.

^^th. -- The troops moved from Bald Hill, Par^^^s brigade to Robinson's,
Huntington's and Patterson's to Nelson's, Nixon's to the gorge of the mountains.

On the morning of the 20th, the British army moved from their encampment, near
the New Bridge, to Dobb's Ferry. The shipping in Tappan Bay came to sail, and
stood down the river. By a new disposition of the American army, on this day,
our General was to command the left wing; it then consisted of two regiments of
horse, and two divisions of infantry.

22d. -- Two deserters came in from Verplank's Point; they reported that the
garrison consisted of about 1000 men. This day about 40 sail of transports
sailed up the Sound. The British army encamped near Dobb's Ferry, their
advanced picket at Jonathan Odle's, three miles below Tarrytown; from this
encampment the enemy moved to Mile-Square, Volentine's Hill, etc. A deserter
from Verplank's Point reported that the British had again taken possession of
Stoney Point, and were repairing the works, their force on both sides of the
river being about 1500; and that they had got up the guns of our galley, which
had been blown up.

25th. -- The British having sent Col. M'Lean, in the month of the preceding
June, with six or seven hundred men, to establish a post at the mouth of
Penobscot river, the Legislature of Massachusetts determined to dislodge them,
and made arrangements for the purpose. The armament, with the troops, made
their appearance on this day before the posts; the issue is detailed in a
subsequent page.

26th. -- Four deserters came in from the enemy; they reported that Stoney
Point was repairing with great expedition, and that Lord Cornwallis arrived at
New York on the 24th.

28th. -- Four deserters came in from the enemy. Capt. Hopkins, of the
dragoons, took the Captain of the Bellona transport, a Sergeant and Corporal of
the 64th British regiment, and two seamen, who had ventured too far on the
shore near Sing-Sing.

29th. -- Two deserters came in from the enemy.

30th. -- Three deserters came in from Verplank's Point. This morning, Capt.
Hopkins, of Moylan's light dragoons, fell in with a party of the enemy, under
Col. Emmerick, near Young's tavern, and charged them vigorously; but the
Colonel being supported by the Hessian Yaugers, Capt. Hopkins was obliged to
retreat: he brought off with him three prisoners and four horses, and killed
six of the enemy on the spot, and wounded a number. Several prisoners which he
had taken, were retaken by the enemy. Capt. Hopkins had one dragoon and two
horses wounded. The British army were under marching orders for several days.

21st. -- Three deserters came in from the enemy. A body of the enemy landed in
the Jersies.

August 1st. -- Capt. Hopkins gave notice that the British army had moved below
Kingsbridge. Three deserters came in from the enemy.

2d. -- Six deserters came in from the enemy. The British army encamped on York
Island: Emmerick's and Bearmore's corpse above Kingsbridge. The American army
remained at their respective posts in the Highlands.

5th. -- About 100 horse, of Shelden's, Moylan's, and of the militia, and about
40 infantry of Glover's brigade, passed by Delaney's mills to the neighbour^^
of Morrisania, where they took 12 or 14 pris^^^rs, some stock, etc. The enemy
collected -- a ^^^^^ish ensued, in which the enemy had a number ^^ men killed
and wounded; our loss, two killed, and two wounded. The British army, below the
7 mile stone on York Island, were alarmed by a report, that a French fleet were
on the coast. Three deserters from Verplank's Point; they reported, that the
garrison, except 400 men, were to remove to New York.

9th. -- Four deserters from the point.

10th. -- Two deserters from the enemy. There were some desertions from our
army to the enemy.

14th. -- Four prisoners, taken the 12th, near Sing-Sing, were sent up, and two
deserters from the British 33d regiment came in.

17th. -- Three deserters from the enemy.

18th. -- Seven deserters came in; the enemy were very strongly fortifying
Laurel-Hill, on New York Island, nearly opposite to Fort Washington.

19th. -- 23 wagon loads of forage were brought off from the vicinity of
Peek's Kill, covered by 250 men, under the command of Lt. Col. Putnam. The
galley and one of the enemy's gun-boats fired a number of cannon-shot at the
party, but did them no harm. The night before, Maj. Lee, with about 400 men,
surprised and took the garrison at Paulus Hook.

20th. -- Two deserters came in from the enemy.

21st. -- Two deserters came in. At night, the enemy's guard-boats came as far
up the river as Antony's Nose, and fired several shot at the camp of our
light-infantry.

23d. -- Three deserters came in from the enemy. The enemy burnt two houses,
belonging to the Lents, near Verplank's Point. Accounts were received, that
Genesis Sullivan had advanced into the Indian country, and taken two of their
principal villages.

25th. -- Admiral Arbuthnot arrived at New York, with about 200 sail of
transports: between 2 and 3,000 troops arrived in the fleets, and a large sum
of money was brought for the army. The continental frigates were very
successful at sea, and sent into Boston several rich sugar ships.

30th. -- Three deserters came in from Verplank's Point; and a prisoner
belonging to the 33d regiment, taken by one of our patrolling parties, was sent
up. About 15 sail of square-rigged vessels, lay at anchor near King's Ferry.
1231 recruits, of the 2,000, ordered by Massachusetts, to serve 9 months, had
already joined the army.

September 4th. -- Three deserters from the enemy.

5th. -- Two deserters came in. Preparations were making in New York, for an
embarkation of troops. The British army sickly, especially the newly arrived
reinforcement.

6th. -- The enemy made an excursion from Kingsbridge, toward Horseneck; on
their return, they carried off some cattle, sheep, poultry, etc. Accounts were
received, that General Sullivan had obtained further advantages in the Indian
country.

9th. -- Two deserters came in from the enemy. Putrid fever and scurvy raged at
New York, among the British troops. The American army remained in their former
position: the Virginia line, near Ramapaugh, on the right; the light-infantry,
near Fort Montgomery; the Maryland line, on the left of the light-infantry;
Pennsylvania line, and two brigades of Massachusetts, at West-Point;
North Carolina brigade, at Constitution Island; the Connecticut line, on the
east side of the Hudson, between Nelson's and Robinson's; Nixon's brigade, at
the gorge of the mountains, above the Continental Village; Glover's brigade,
Moylan's, Sheldon's, and Armand's horse, at Lower Salem. On the west side of
the Hudson, besides Fort Clinton, at West-Point, and Fort Putnam, on the height
back of it, there were seven or eight redoubts, built and building. On the east
side of the river, the north and middle redoubts, and a redoubt at the gorge of
the mountains. Great expectations of the arrival of a French fleet on the
American coast.

13th. -- Four deserters came in from the enemy.

14th. -- Just after revelle, our General received orders to put Nixon's
brigade under marching orders, which was done immediately. Genesis How was
ordered to move with Glover's to Pine's Bridge, Croten River, and Nixon's to
join him.

15th. -- A deserter came in from Verplank's Point. The day before, a party of
the enemy's horse came out from Kingsbridge, with intent to surprise Lieut.
Col. White; but, by the desertion of one of the party, they were disappointed.
The Count de la Luzerne, the new French Minister, arrived, and dined at Genesis
Washington's.

16th. -- Nixon's brigade marched to form a junction with Glover's, and a
picket of 150 men mounted at the Village. Four deserters came in from the
enemy. The Count Luzerne was highly pleased with the treatment he received in
passing through the New England States. The 17th, he left headquarters, on his
way to Philadelphia.

18th. -- Genesis How was ordered to march back to Lower Salem, with Glover's and
Nixon's brigades.

19th. -- Two deserters came in from the enemy. Some appearances indicated an
evacuation of Verplank's Point.

22d. -- A deserter came in from Kingsbridge. Preparations for the embarkation
of a large body of troops continued at New York.

29th. -- Two deserters from the enemy, and one the day before.

30th. -- The engineers, covered by a detachment of 300 men, reconnoitred the
enemy's works at Verplank's; the enemy appeared to be much alarmed, and fired a
number of cannon and small-arms at our party, and a reinforcement came over
from Soney Point. At evening another deserter came in.

October 1st. -- The American light-infantry moved down near to Kakeat, and the
North Carolina brigade from Constitution Island to New-Windsor. One deserter
from the enemy.

2d. -- Two deserters came in from the enemy. Certain intelligence was
received, that the Count D'Estaing had arrived at Georgia. The enemy, at
Verplank's Point, opened a number of pits, about five feet deep, and four feet
over, with a sharp stake in the middle, around the outside of the abbatis. By
the last accounts from Genesis Sullivan, he was at Tioga, on his return this way;
he had destroyed a great number of Indian towns, and immense quantities of corn
and other produce, and cut down many fruit trees. It is a great pity the latter
were not spared; they would have been very pleasing to the American settlers,
who will one day, not far distant, fill that fertile country.

A number of armed vessels, from the Connecticut ports on the Sound, cut and
brought off a number of the enemy's vessels from Huntington harbor,
Long Island, and the Halifax brig was taken by an armed galley.

4th. -- Five deserters came in from the enemy. Genesis How was ordered to take
post again at Pine's Bridge.

5th. -- The Sieur Gerard, the late French Minister, came to camp, and dined at
headquarters. Two days before, Lieut. Gill, of the dragoons, patrolling in
East-Chester, found a superior force in his rear, and no alternative but to
surrender or cut his way through them; he chose the latter, and forced his way,
when he found a body of infantry still behind the horse; these he also charged,
and on his passing them, his horse was wounded and threw him, when he fell into
the enemy's hands. Two of the Lieutenant's party, which consisted of 24, were
killed, and one taken prisoner; the rest escaped safe to their regiments.

Congress about this time appointed the Hon. John Adams, a Plenipotentiary,
extra, to repair to France, to negociate for a peace with Great Britain, when
an opportunity occurred. The British fortified Governor's Island, in the
harbor of New York, and appeared under great apprehensions of a visit from the
French fleet under the Count D'Estaing. The troops and shipping at Rhode Island
were ordered to New York.

7th. -- One deserter from Verplank's Point. There was a cannonade between our
infantry at Grassy Point and one of the enemy's guard-ships, when the latter
was driven from her moorings.

8th. -- The light-infantry of Glover's brigade crossed the Hudson to join Genesis
Wayne. The British had a number of ships ready to sink in the channel, in case
a French fleet arrived, and attempted to enter the harbor of New York. The
merchants in the city packing up their goods.

9th. -- A fleet of transports passed the Sound toward Rhode Island.

The General Officers of the American army resolved to address Congress,
respecting themselves and the army.

11th. -- There was a cannonade in the river between the American and British
gun-boats; but no damage was done.

Sir Joseph York, the British Minister at the Hague, addressed their High
Mightinesses on the 22d of the preceding July, in such language as evinced the
feelings of the British nation. One deserter from Verplank's Point.

12th. -- Genesis Sir Henry Clinton and Col. Robinson came up to Verplank's Point,
in the ship Fanny, and returned the next day; after which, the workmen at the
points ceased working. The troops of the enemy sickly at the points.

13th. -- Two deserters came in.

14th. -- Two prisoners of war were sent up, and four deserters came in. The
British transports were collected near Turtle Bay, and their ships of war near
the Narrows.

15th. -- Seven deserters came in from Verplank's Point; they reported that the
enemy were putting their baggage, sick, the women, etc. on board the transports.

16th. -- 14 prisoners, seamen, taken by Capt. Hallet's company of New York
militia, two days before, on the North River, near Teller's Point, were sent
up, and one deserter came in. Just before sunset, a galley and several of the
enemy's gun-boats came up the river as high as Fort Montgomery, and fired a
number of shot at some of our boats, and at the troops on the west side of the
river; the Americans discharged some muskets from the banks at the boats, and
the latter returned down the river.

17th. -- One deserter came in from the enemy.

19th. -- One deserter from Verplank's Point.

21st. -- Three deserters came in from Verplank's, and reported, that the enemy
were on the point of evacuating their works. The officer commanding the advance
picket, soon after sent information that the works appeared to be on fire, and
the shipping standing down the river. Maj. Waldbridge, who commanded the
advanced picket, immediately sent a detachment to take possession of the works.
Several loaded shells left by the enemy, in places where the fire would come at
them, burst, but did no harm. The enemy left one horse, a few old intrenching
tools, and some other trifles at the point. The transports came to anchor off
the mouth of Croten River; and information was received that the British
grenadiers were on board transports, in the river near Fort Washington, and the
7th and 33d regiments in readiness to embark at a moment's notice. Our General,
lest there might be an attempt made on Genesis Howe's division, ordered a
detachment of 500 men, and half the Village picket, under the command of Col.
Bradley, to march, and take post, during the night, toward the New Bridge, on
Croten River, to cover the right flank of Howe's division.

22d. -- About noon, the enemy's transports came to sail with the ebb, and beat
down against the wind, and were soon out of sight.

24th. -- Col. Bradley's detachment returned to camp. The Colonel reported that
he observed large quantities of forage and fruit, in the fields between
Verplank's Point and Croten River. To secure the forage, and cover the
communication by King's Ferry, Genesis Washington ordered our General to move down
and encamp at Peek's Kill.

27th. -- The Connecticut line moved down and encamped on the high ground to
the southward of Peek's Kill, and Maj. Genesis Howe's division was ordered up to
form a junction. The day before, the enemy landed a body of troops, said to be
some thousands strong, at Amboy, and advanced toward Brunswick. The
light-infantry, and the Virginia line, were ordered to move down that way.

A man, who said he was a Lieutenant in the British service, and who produced a
commission, came out, pretending that he had been ill-treated, etc.

The State of Massachusetts appeared to be determined to fill up their
regiments, and offered 300 dollars bounty to those who would enlist, in
addition to the Continental bounty, which was 200 dollars, making the whole
bounty 500 dollars. This morning about 70 sail of vessels, many of them large
ships, passed down the Sound, having the garrison of Rhode Island on board.

When the enemy landed yesterday at South-Amboy, 96 horse about the same time
landed at Perth-Amboy, and proceeded rapidly to Middlebrook-burnt Rariton
meeting house, Somerset courthouse, and six boats, and returned through
Spotswood to South-Amboy. This party, on its retreat, was met by 13 of the
militia, who fired upon them, killed one man and four horses, and took the
commanding officer, Lieut. Simcoe, and one trooper, prisoners. By the capture
of Simcoe, the inhabitants were freed of a very enterprising and troublesome
officer. The destruction of the boats was the object of this enterprise.

29th. -- Genesis Howe's division formed a junction with the Connecticut line, and
encamped with them. Strong fatigue parties were daily employed on the works
evacuated by the enemy at Verplank's and Stoney Points. Genesis Lincoln and the
Count D'Estaing, by the last accounts from Georgia, had formed a junction, and
were determined to attack the enemy.

31st. -- Maj. Bunschoten arrived at camp, with a detachment of Lieut. Col.
Paulding's New York levies; they were ordered to garrison Stoney Point.

November 1st. -- Maj. Armstrong, Aid-de-camp to Maj. Genesis Gates, called at
camp, on his way to Congress, with official dispatches of the evacuation of
Rhode Island, which took place on the night of the 26th ult. The British left
large quantities of forage, fuel, etc. Brigadier-General Stark had gone on to
Rhode Island. A Hessian Lieutenant belonging to the Landgrave regiment, came
out from the neighborhood of Fort Washington; he pretended a desire to enter
the American service as a volunteer. A prisoner of war was also sent up from
the advanced guard.

2d. -- Intelligence was received, that a body of Indians were advancing
toward Fort Schuyler.

7th. -- Two German Yaugers, with their rifles, came to our camp. At night,
Col. Armand proceeded with his corpse from near Tarrytown to the vicinity of
Morrisania, to the house of Alderman Leggit, where he surprised and took Maj.
Bearmore and five others prisoners. The secrecy, precaution, gallantry and
discipline exhibited by the Colonel and his corpse on this occasion did them
much honor. In the capture of Maj. Bearmore, the inhabitants of the adjacent
country were relieved from the frequent excursions of a troublesome officer.
The British augmented their troops on Staten-Island.

11th. -- Two deserters came in from Col. Wurmb's Yaugers.

13th. -- Five prisoners taken by Lieut. Oakley, near Morrisania, were sent to
camp. The enemy had a redoubt, called No. 8, on the east side of Haarlem Creek,
nearly opposite to the fort on Laurel Hill, and under the fire of its cannon,
for the security of their advanced troops on the Morrisania side.

16th. -- Intelligence was received, that on the 23d of September, Genesis Lincoln
and the Count D'Estaing broke ground before the enemy's works, at Savannah in
Georgia; and on the 5th of October, batteries of 33 cannon and nine mortars,
were opened and continued firing with intervals, until the 8th, without the
wished for effect.

9th. -- In the morning an assault was made, which proved unsuccessful -- the
Americans were repulsed and obliged to retreat; of the Americans, 170 were
killed and wounded; among the former, Count POLASKI, a remarkably brave and
enterprising officer, of Polish descent. The Count D'Estaing was wounded in the
arm and leg. It was said, that of the French troops, 330 were killed and
wounded. Genesis Lincoln retreated to Charleston. It being rendered certain that
the Count D'Estaing would not come to the northward, the American main army was
distributed to winter quarters. -- Moylan's, Sheldon's, Baylor's, and Bedkins's
dragoons to Connecticut -- Poor's brigade to Danbury -- The Massachusetts line
to West-Point, and the posts in the Highlands -- The Virginia, Maryland,
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, and Connecticut lines, Hand's and Stark's
mixed corpse, back of the Scotch Plains, New Jersey -- Lee's corpse, and a
detachment of infantry, toward Monmouth -- Marechausee, with the main army.

19th. -- Four prisoners were sent up.

23d. -- Maj. Genesis Gates and his family came to camp from Rhode Island.

25th. -- The troops were moving to their different places of cantonment; many
of the soldiers, (as fine men as ever stood in shoes) were marched barefooted
over the hard frozen ground, and with an astonishing patience. Remember these
things, ye Americans, in future times!

28th. -- The Commander in Chief gave our General the command of all the posts
and troops on Hudson's River, which Genesis Washington very frequently called the
key that locked the communication between the eastern and southern States; and
of all the posts in the United States, was the most important. This was the
second time that our General was designated to command them.

29th. -- Three deserters came in from the galley in the river.

30th. -- Early in the morning, Genesis Washington crossed the Hudson at
King's-Ferry, into the Jersies. Maj. Genesis Gates was to proceed to Virginia -- a
sergeant, corporal, and three privates, were carried off by one Joseph M'Keel,
a sly, artful fellow, in the service of the enemy, and who conducted many
recruits from the country to them.

December 2d. -- Col. Armand, with some of his corpse, went down to Morrissania,
and took a Capt. Cruzer, of Bearmore's corpse, and two men, prisoners. At this
time the troops were greatly distressed for bread, and the horses for forage;
the former occasioned by the want of water at the mills. All the horses, except
such as were absolutely necessary for incumbent duties, were ordered out into
the country. A man, who pretended to be a prophet, came out from the enemy --
he more probably was a spy.

16th. -- Col. Paulding's corpse was ordered from Stoney Point to Poughkeepsie,
a great desertion having taken place in the corpse. The Virginia line had
marched to the southward -- the enemy at New York, preparing for the
embarkation of a large body of troops, said to be upwards of 10,000, under the
immediate command of Genesis Sir Henry Clinton.

29th. -- Three Hessian deserters came into our army; they reported that Genesis
Matthews had the command of all the posts and troops on the north end of York
Island, above the bridge, etc. The long talked of embarkation of troops at
New York, sailed on the 26th. The fleet was said to consist of near 200 sail.
The enemy boasted that it was convoyed by nearly 20 ships of war; however, it
was well known that they had very few ships of the line, and that they were
under great apprehensions of falling in with a superior French force. They went
to the southward.

30th. -- Lieut. Col. Newhall, with 250 men properly officered, marched to do
duty on the lines.

31st. -- There was a great body of snow on the ground.

1780. January 1st. -- Early in the morning about 100 soldiers belonging to the
Massachusetts regiments, who had enlisted, at different periods subsequent to
January, 1777, for three years, pretending that their time of service now
expired, (although many of them had months to serve, before their three years
service was completed) marched off with intent to go home: they were pursued
and brought back: some of them were punished; the greater part of them
pardoned. Some others, at other posts, conducted in the same manner, and were
treated as the first mentioned. Those whose time of service was expired, were
all discharged with honor.

3d. -- The snow had got to be about four feet deep on a level, and the troops
were driven to great difficulties in keeping open the communications to the
posts -- obtaining provisions, fuel, forage, etc. and so intense and steady was
the weather, that for more than twenty days there could not be discovered the
least sign of the remission of the snow in any places the most open to the
influences of the sun. The Hudson soon becoming passable on the ice, the troops
were comfortably supplied with provisions; but many were in extreme want of
clothing.

8th. -- The light-infantry belonging to the regiments in the Highlands, were
joining their respective corpse; the corpse of light-infantry being separated for
the winter.

9th. -- About dusk, the north redoubt was discovered to be on fire at the
southwest corner, under the rampart, which was of timber; the fire was out of
reach, and threatened the destruction of the whole redoubt. A detachment from
West-Point was ordered over to the assistance of the garrison of the redoubt;
but so strongly dovetailed and strapped were the timbers of the rampart, that
the fire for a time seemed to baffle every exertion to extinguish it. The
ammunition, and about 100 barrels of salted provisions in the magazine, were
seasonably removed by the garrison; but the fire was not extinguished until
about four o'clock on the morning of the 10th. All the officers and men
distinguished themselves on this occasion; but the conduct of Col. Lyman, Col.
Sprout, and Capt. Drew, were conspicuous indeed, as was that of a Sergeant of
the garrison of the redoubt, who, when all were on the point of quitting the
redoubt, lest the magazine should take fire and blow up, instantly rushed into
the magazine, and did not quit it until he had thrown out every cask of powder,
and box of ammunition deposited in it. If his name could be recollected, it
should be inserted.

12th. -- Artificers and fatigue-men were ordered to repair the redoubt. The
weather continued intensely cold. A man belonging to the garrison of West-Point
was frozen to death on his return from New-Windsor to the point; and many
soldiers were frost-bitten. Maj. Genesis Putnam, who had gone home on furlough
about this time, received a paralytic stroke at Hartford in Connecticut, as he
was on his return to the army.

17th. -- The Hudson was so frozen, that travelers safely crossed the river on
the ice at King's-Ferry. A Hessian deserter came in. Two days before, viz. on
the 15th, Maj. Genesis Lord Sterling made a descent on Staten Island, with a
detachment, consisting of about 2,500 infantry, and some artillery; a number of
tents, arms, and some baggage, belonging to Col. Buskirk's regiment, was taken
and brought off, with some liquors, etc. Some of the American soldiers deserted
to the enemy, and 17 were taken prisoners.

19th. -- Two deserters came in from the enemy, and reported the strength of
the British at Fort Washington. The people crossed from New York to Long Island
on the ice. About this time, a detachment from Col. Mead's regiment of levies
at Horseneck, and a number of volunteers from Greenwich, the former under the
command of Captain Keeler, the latter under the command of Captain Lockwood,
the whole about 80, marched to Morrissania; and about one o'clock in the
morning, made an attack on Col. Hatfield. They first attacked the picket,
killed 3, and drove the rest into the Colonel's quarters. The Colonel and his
men took to the chambers, and fired out at the windows, and down stairs at
those who had entered the house; it appearing difficult, if possible, to
dislodge them, the house was instantly set on fire, by putting a straw bed into
a closet, which compelled the enemy to jump out at the chamber windows, to
avoid the flames. Colonel Hatfield, one Captain, one Lieutenant, one
Quartermaster, and 11 privates, were taken prisoners and brought off. This was
a pretty affair, but was a little tarnished on the return by some of the
militia, who were fatigued, loitering on the road where they supposed there was
no danger; but a party of horse pursuing, overtook, killed and captured several
of them.

26th. -- Between 11 and 12 o'clock at night, a fire broke out in the
Quarter-Master's barrack at West-Point, which threatened the most serious and
extensive damage. It had got to considerable height before it was discovered;
the barrack was consequently consumed to ashes, notwithstanding every exertion
of the garrison, which was numerous, Brig. Genesis Patterson, who commanded the
garrison, not only distinguished himself, but also exposed his person to the
flames to save another building, which was fortunately effected. The loss by
the fire was considerable, both to the public and to individuals. The night
before, viz. the 25th, a detachment of the enemy, said to consist of 500 men,
made an excursion from Staten Island, over the ice, to Elizabeth-Town, in the
Jersies, and completely surprised the picket posted there, consisting of a
Major and 100 men, properly officered; it was said that not a gun was fired,
nor a man hurt. The enemy surrounded the houses, and took the troops asleep. --
He who suffers himself to be surprised, through the want of proper precaution,
his character (says a great military writer) is irretrievable.

February 1st. -- At two o'clock in the morning, the north redoubt was
discovered to be on fire again in the top of the bomb-proof, between the
sally-port and the door. Every exertion was made by the garrison of the
redoubt, and detachments sent to their aid, to put out the fire, but it was so
much out of reach, and spread among the joints of the large timbers, that it
was not extinguished until about two o'clock on the morning of the 3d. The
redoubt received considerable damage, and would have been totally destroyed,
had it not been for the unwearied exertions of the troops, day and night,
during the whole of the time; and much credit was due to Lieut. Col. Vose, and
the other officers who commanded. By a more accurate account of the loss at the
Quarter-Master's barrack at West-Point, it appeared that 6 marquis, 26
horseman's tents, 80 common tents, 900 knapsacks, 250 narrow axes, and a number
of other articles were burnt and destroyed.

On the morning of the 3d, about 9 o'clock, the enemy made an attack on Lieut.
Col. Thomson, who commanded the troops on the lines; the Colonel's force
consisted of 250 men, in five companies, properly officered; they were
instructed to move between Croten River and the White Plains, Hudson's River
and Bedford; never to remain long at any one place, that the enemy might not be
able to learn their manner of doing duty, or form a plan for striking them in
any particular situation. The Colonel had for some days taken post himself at
Young's, not far from the White Plains. Capt. Watson, with his company, was
with the Lieut. Colonel; Capt. Roberts and Capt. Stoddard, with their
companies, were on the right; Capt. Lieut. Farley and Capt. Cooper on the left.
The force of the enemy consisted of the four flank companies of the first and
second British regiments of guards -- detachments from two Hessian battalions
-- some mounted yaugers, and mounted refugees. The whole under the command of
Col. Norton, of the guards. The roads were so filled with snow, that the enemy
advanced but slowly, and were obliged to leave their fieldpieces behind on the
road. They were discovered at a distance by Mr. Campbell, one of our guides,
who, from the goodness of his horse, reconnoitred them pretty near. He gave the
Lieutenant Colonel notice of their advancing, and that their force was
considerable, and advised him to take a stronger position a little in his rear.
But the Lieutenant Colonel was very confident that the enemy were only a body
of horse, and that he could easily disperse them, and would not quit his
ground. The enemy first attacked a small advance-guard, consisting of a
Sergeant and 8 men, who behaved well, and meant to reach the main body in
season; but were prevented by the horse, and all taken prisoners. The enemy's
horse soon appeared in sight of the Americans, and discharged their rifles at
long shot, and waited the coming up of the infantry, when a warm action
commenced; the enemy scattered, taking the advantage of the ground and trees in
the orchard, and closing up on all sides. The 3 companies of the detachment,
which had joined, fought well. After about 15 minutes' sharp conflict, our
troops broke; some took into the house, and others made off; the enemy's horse
rushing on at the same instant, and the whole shouting. At this time, the two
flank companies came up, but finding how matters stood, judged it best to
retreat, Capt. Stodder's company giving a fire or two at long shot, Capt.
Cooper's, from their distance, not firing at all. Some who were engaged
effected their escape, others were overtaken by the horse. The enemy collected
what prisoners they could, set Mr. Young's house and buildings on fire, and
returned. Of the Americans, 13 were killed dead on the spot, and Capt. Roberts,
who was mortally wounded, lived but a few minutes. Seventeen others were
wounded, several of whom died. Lieut. Col. Thomson of Marshall's, Capt. Watson
of Greaton's, Capt. Lieut. Farley of Wesson's, Lieut. Burley of Tupper's,
Lieut. Maynard of Greaton's, Ensign Fowler of Nixon's, Ensign Bradley of
Bigelow's, with 89 others, were taken prisoners. The enemy left 3 men dead on
the field, and a Captain of grenadiers was wounded in the hip, and a Lieutenant
of infantry in the thigh. The British, in their account of the action,
acknowledged that they had 5 men killed, and 18 wounded. Lieut. Col. Badlam,
with the relief for the lines, was at the time of the action far advanced on
his march, but not within reach of those engaged.

One Mayhew, a peddler, well known in Massachusetts, was of this detachment; he
made off up the road, but finding the horse rushing on, he struck off into the
snow, almost up to his hips. Two of the enemy's horse turned into his track
after him; and, gaining fast upon him, he asked them if they would give him
quarter; they replied, "Yes, you dog, we will quarter you." This was twice
repeated; when Mayhew, finding them inflexible, determined to give them one
shot before he was quartered; and, turning round, discharged his piece at the
first horseman, who cried out, "The rascal has broke my leg;" when both of them
turned their horses round and went off, leaving Mayhew at liberty to tread back
his path to the road, and come off.

7th. -- A body of the enemy's horse, said to be about 300, and the 7th British
regiment, came over from Long Island to West-Chester on the ice. The troops in
New York, about this time, drew four days' provisions, which they were directed
to keep cooked, and the troops to be in readiness to move on the shortest
notice, with arms and blankets only. A number of sleighs were collected, and
some heavy cannon were drawn out; whether an attempt on Morristown or the
Highlands was the object, was not known. Several deserters came in from the
enemy, and in this month there were some desertions from the American southern
regiments to the enemy. The enemy also made an excursion in the Jersies, as far
as Elizabeth-Town, and carried off a great quantity of plunder.

19th. -- Some small parties of the enemy were out toward the White Plains.

Our General having obtained leave, from the Commander in Chief, to make a
visit to his friends in New England, commenced his journey eastward, on the
21st of February, and reached his house in Roxbury on the 29th. It appeared
that the winter had been as severe, and the snow as deep, in the New England
States, as in the Highlands of New York.

March 8th. -- Our General addressed the Hon. Council of Massachusetts, on the
importance of the then moment for recruiting their battalions.

By the master of a flag from Bermuda, information was received, that the
fleet, in passing from New York to the southward, the preceding December,
suffered considerably; and that an ordnance ship was lost.

9th. -- A privateer ship, of 18 guns, prize to the Tartar privateer, was sent
into Boston.

13th. -- The Committee of the General Court of Massachusetts were issuing
notes for the depreciation of the pay of the troops of their line: these were
sold at a very great discount.

20th. -- A rich Jamaica ship, prize to the continental frigate Dean, arrived
safe in Boston harbor. The same day, there was a report that Sir Henry Clinton
had arrived at South Carolina, with the British troops, which sailed from
New York in December.

The Legislature of Massachusetts passed a resolution, granting a premium of L
30 per man for each recruit that should be enlisted and pass muster for their
line.

27th. -- A Marblehead privateer, the Aurora, sent in a prize ship, with 1600
barrels of flour -- 1400 do. of beef and pork; and dry goods to the amount of L
700 sterling.

April 1st. -- News was received of a most obstinate engagement in Europe,
between the French frigate, Sueveillant, Capt. Conedic, of 36 guns, and the
British frigate, Quebec, Capt. Farmer, of the same force. The French frigate
had 32 men killed, and 92 wounded. The Quebec blew up, and her whole crew, 300,
except 40, were lost, either in action or in the explosion. This engagement did
honor to the bravery of both nations.

The depreciation of the continental money rapidly increased; many people
withheld their merchandise and produce from sale, and the times were truly
embarrassing. An embarkation of some thousands of Hessian troops took place at
New York for Carolina. In the course of this month, the Maryland line of the
army, and three companies of artillery, marched to the southward.

26th. -- News was received that the British had got their shipping over the
bar, at Charleston; that the continental frigates, in the harbor, were hauled
up, and their guns taken out and mounted on batteries: the garrison of
Charleston numerous.

27th. -- The privateers Franklin and Jack sent into Salem a large
letter-of-marque ship, having on board 1,000 barrels of pork and beef, 750
barrels of flour, 800 firkins of butter, and dry goods to the amount of L
15,000; she was from London, bound to New York.

During this month, the enemy made two excursions to Paramus, where they killed
and took a number of Americans; Maj. Byles, of the Pennsylvania line, was
mortally wounded, and died the next day. The enemy burnt Mr. G. Hoper's houses
and mills; the militia turned out spiritedly, repulsed and pursued the enemy.
By accounts from Europe, the American cause was viewed in a very favorable
light, by the Courts in that part of the world.

28th. -- The French frigate Hermeoue, Capt. Latouch, arrived at Boston; in
whom came the Marquis de la Fayette, and suite, from France. The inhabitants of
Boston exhibited the greatest demonstrations of joy, on the occasion. The next
morning the Marquis, Capt. Latouch, and other officers, made a visit to our
General: the Marquis, the day before, on his landing at Hancock's Wharf, was
received by a number of Continental officers, and escorted to his lodgings;
after which, he paid his respects to the Honorable Legislature, who were then
in session; in the evening there were rejoicings.

May 2d. -- The Marquis de la Fayette set out from Boston, for the army.

During the session of the Legislature of Massachusetts, they received an order
from Congress, in favor of the State, for 2,000,000 dollars, to reimburse the
State in part of the expense of the Penobscot expedition, which had greatly
involved the State. The enemy having taken post at Penobscot, the Legislature
of Massachusetts, without applying to Congress, determined to dislodge them;
and, for this purpose, ordered a body of militia to be detached, under the
command of Brig. Genesis Lovell; and, in addition to their own State vessels,
procured a number of privateers, belonging to individuals. The expedition was
attempted; the shipping arrived safe in Penobscot Bay; the troops, or a part of
them, were debarked to attack the enemy, but they did not succeed in their
attempt. The armed vessels, instead of cruizing off the harbor, where they
could have had sea room, remained in the bay. The enemy sent a naval force to
the relief of the post, which arrived, and found the American shipping in the
river, who immediately ran up as far as they could, where the whole were
destroyed, and the militia and seamen left to find their way home through the
woods. This was an unfortunate affair to Massachusetts, whose privateers,
before, were numerous, able and active, and greatly annoyed the enemy; and, had
it not been for this blow, would have been of great public benefit, by
depriving the enemy of many of their provision vessels, and of increasing
provisions in our own country. Congress, at first, seemed to decline bearing
the expense, as they had never been consulted respecting the expedition; but
they finally consented to a reimbursement.

Congress ordered, that 800 men, in the pay of the United States, should cover
and protect the Eastern Country the ensuing summer.

12th. -- The gentlemen of Boston gave a ball to the French and American
officers.

14th. -- The Hermeone frigate, Capt. Latouch, sailed from Boston harbor, on a
cruize.

A number of very valuable prizes, taken by the American cruizers, were sent
into different ports.

The 19th exhibited a most extraordinary phenomenon. The wind, in the morning,
was southerly, a moderate breeze; the sun shone a little after it was up, but
was soon clouded: there was some thunder and moderate showers. A little after
10 o'clock, the clouds exhibited a yellowish cast, and every object seemed to
present a brassy hue; it soon after began to grow dark, which gradually
increased; between eleven and twelve, it became necessary to light candles, to
do household business. The darkness increased until near one o'clock, P. M. the
inhabitants dining by candlelight. About one, the darkness began to decrease,
and went off gradually, as it came on; between three and four, P. M. the usual
light was restored. The evening, although the moon was at the full, was
remarkably dark, and there was a sprinkling of rain -- the people were in great
consternation. This phenomenon, in the opinion of our General, although he has
no pretensions to astronomy, was produced by opposite winds forcing together a
vast body of smoke and vapors, (the air had been smoaky for some days before)
which, from the light state of the atmosphere, as they accumulated, ascended,
forming, from top to bottom, such a body, as to cause the darkness; and yet, so
open were the particles, as to admit the sun's rays so far, as to cause the
brassy appearance: had the atmosphere been heavy, the vapors would probably
have condensed, and rain, in torrents, would have ensued. Some observations
made by our General, some years since the foregoing, on the darkness in Canada,
and which, on the afternoon of the preceding day, he noticed at Roxbury, and
remarked thereon, afford strong collateral evidence that the foregoing opinion
was not wholly unfounded.

As the learned and curious wish to ascertain, as far as possible, the true
cause of the phenomenon, we throw in those rough materials, which our
observation, at the time, collected, that they may be shaped by those of
greater skill, for the information and satisfaction of an enlightened public.
Those called the dark days, in Canada, were the 9th, 15th and 16th of October,
1785; but the greatest degree of darkness was on Sunday, the 16th, when the
darkness was so great as to render the use of candles necessary in the churches
and families: it is said to have been as dark as a dark night.

On the 9th, at Roxbury, in Massachusetts, the wind was at south-east, and then
at south-west; the day fair, cool and pleasant.

The 15th, the prevailing wind was easterly; the day was cloudy and foggy;
about 2 o'clock, P. M. it was uncommonly dark, and there was an opposite wind
from the south-west. There were several hard claps of thunder at a distance,
and a few drops of rain. Toward evening, the sun was visible, but appeared
very red, and the clouds exhibited a brassy complexion, so similar to the dark
day in May, 1780, as to be noticed and compared; in the evening the wind was
southerly.

The 16th, which was the dark day in Canada, the wind, there at opposite
points, N. E. and S. W. was at Roxbury S. W. The day was fair, warm and
pleasant; from which it seems to be obvious, that the body of smoke and vapor,
with which the atmosphere was fraught on the 15th, which pervaded a region
which comprehended Canada and a part of New England at least, was, by the
strength of the south-west wind in the night, forced northward, and being still
opposed by the north-east wind, pressing on the other side, produced the
accumulation of smoke and vapor which occasioned the darkness; and if the
north-east wind had prevailed against the south-west, the darkness would
probably have been in New England.

21st. -- Capt. Latouch returned from his cruize; he ran into Penobscot Bay,
and cast anchor, firing several signal guns. Two British sloops of war, which
were at anchor, upon the approach of the Hermeone, came to sail, and ran up the
river. Capt. Latouch lay at anchor until he took a plan of the enemy's post.
Our General intended to have commenced his journey for the army on Monday, the
29th of May; but on the afternoon of the preceding day, he received a letter
from Genesis Washington, dated the 15th, in which his Excellency observed, "I have
the pleasure to inform you, in strict confidence, that we have authentic
advices of his most Christian Majesty's determination to send a respectable
armament of sea and land forces to operate on the continent, and that the
period is not remote when we may expect their arrival." The Commander in Chief
added, that the seizing of Halifax was an object with the French; and our
General was instructed to obtain, as soon as possible, the exact state of the
British in that quarter, as to their works, garrisons and troops; all of which
was shortly after ascertained.

29th. -- The Hermeone fell down, in order to proceed on a cruize to the
southward. The troops at West-Point at this time were very short of provisions,
and without rum.

Congress and the Commander in Chief called upon the several States to complete
their battalions of the army with all possible dispatch. The enemy at New York
were under great apprehensions of a visit from the French, and were said to
have prepared a number of hulks of different sizes to sink in the channel.

June 6th. -- News was received, that a French fleet had been seen at sea, in
latitude 33, standing E. N. E.

About this time, Capt. Latouch sent into Dartmouth a prize brig, having 1700
firkins of butter, 150 boxes of candles, and 150 boxes of soap on board. The
Legislature of Massachusetts ordered a draft to be made from the militia, to
complete their Continental battalions. The drafts were to rendezvous at
Springfield.

9th. -- Our General received the following letter from the Commander in Chief.

HEADQUARTERS, MORRISTOWN, June 2, 1780. DEAR SIR,
IT is expected that the fleet of our ally will, in the first instance, touch
at Rhode Island for the purpose of landing their sick and supernumerary stores,
and to meet the intelligence necessary to direct their operations. I have
already sent forward Doctor Craik, to take up proper houses for hospitals, and
to make some previous arrangements in that department: but I apprehend the
French General and Admiral will, upon their arrival, want the advice and
assistance of a person of discretion and judgment, and acquainted with the
country. I must request you to repair immediately to Providence, and, upon
their arrival, present yourself to them, letting them know that they may
command your services.

I would wish you to endeavor, in conjunction with the Governor, to establish
a market between the fleet and army and country, and be careful that our allies
are not imposed upon in the prices of articles which they may find necessary.
This is a point recommended in the plan drawn up by the Ministry of France, and
which policy and generosity directs should be strictly attended to.

(Signed) G. WASHINGTON.

Genesis HEATH.

About this time, an engagement happened between the Hermeone and a British
man-of-war, which lasted near two glasses; it was a drawn battle. Capt.
Latouch, and one of his Lieutenants, were wounded; and it was said 13 men were
killed and 39 wounded. Several of the wounded died soon after; among them, an
officer.

15th. -- At 11 o'clock, A. M. our General set out from his house, in Roxbury,
for Providence, where he arrived the next day, at 2 o'clock, P. M. was met at
Patucket Bridge by Deputy Governor Bowen, and a number of other gentlemen, who
attended him into town.

On Friday, the 2d of June, the Continental frigate, the Trumbull, James
Nicholson commander, had an engagement with a British frigate of 36 guns, which
lasted five hours. The Trumbull had all her masts wounded, 8 men killed, and 31
wounded. The British frigate was supposed to have suffered much.

In this month, a body of the enemy, under the command of Genesis Knyphausen,
landed in the Jersies, and moved toward Springfield. Some skirmishing ensued;
Col. Angel's regiment suffered considerably. A number of men were killed on
both sides. It was now fully confirmed that the enemy's shipping passed Fort
Moultrie, on Sullivan's Island, in South Carolina, on the 9th of April, with a
fresh breeze, by which means they received but little damage: they came to
anchor between Fort Johnson and Charleston, and just out of reach of the
latter. Genesis Sir Henry Clinton had now advanced his approaches so far, as to be
erecting his batteries. The garrison made a good defense, but, on the 12th of
May, were obliged to surrender. Of the Americans, 1 Colonel, 1 Aid-de-camp, 6
Captains, 3 Lieutenants, 10 Sergeants, and 68 rank and file, were killed; 1
Major, 2 Captains, 5 Lieutenants, 18 Sergeants, and 114 rank and file were
wounded. Maj. Genesis Lincoln, with Brigadiers Moultrie, M'Intosh, Woodford,
Scott, Duportail and Hogan, with 9 Colonels, 14 Lieut. Colonels, 15 Majors, 84
Captains and Capt. Lieutenants, 84 Lieutenants, 32 Second Lieutenants and
Ensigns, 209 non-commissioned officers, 140 drums and fifes, and 1977 rank and
file, including sick and wounded, of the Continental troops, making in the
whole, 2564, were taken prisoners. Besides the foregoing, it was said that
there were about 500 naval officers and seamen, 250 Charleston militia, and 500
country militia, also taken -- the enemy pretended many more. About 20 American
soldiers deserted to the enemy, during the siege. Besides the artillery and
stores which fell into the hands of the enemy, (the former being 220 pieces,
from 3 to 26 pounders) the Continental frigates, Providence, Boston, Ranger,
and Queen of France, with 4 State galleys, and one French ship of war, were
lost. It was supposed that about 500 American men, women and children, were
killed, during the siege. The enemy's loss, in killed and wounded, was
considerable. The enemy broke ground before the town on the first of April, at
the distance of 800 yards from the American works. Before the surrender of the
place, it was contemplated in Council of War, to embark the garrison, except
about one regiment, on board the shipping, in the night, and run up the river,
and land them; thereby to save the army, leaving those in the town to make the
best terms they could. This opinion for some time prevailed, but it was
afterward given up.

7th. -- The British fleet left Charleston, said to consist of 2 ships of the
line, 2 fifties, 2 forty-gunships, 6 or 7 frigates, and between 80 and 90
transports; near 2,000 negroes were put on board the fleet. Lord Cornwallis,
with about 2,000 men, marched from Charleston toward North Carolina. A few
days after the surrender of Charleston to the British troops, the grand
arsenal, wherein was deposited all the arms, etc. taken from the Americans,
took fire and blew up, by which it was said a number of men were killed and
wounded. The loss of Charleston roused the country, and seemed to give a check
to that spirit of avarice and speculation which had but too much prevailed in
all places, and a determination, by every exertion, to drive the enemy from the
country, appeared to be catching from breast to breast.

At Rhode Island, every preparation was making for the reception of the French
fleet and army. The handsome college at Providence was given up for a hospital.
The American privateers had been very successful, and many valuable prizes were
sent in.

24th. -- Monsieur Corney, a French Commissary, arrived at Providence. About
this time, it was suspected that the enemy at New York had some intentions of
an attempt on our posts in the Highlands; and some of their shipping were up
the Hudson.

On the morning of the 30th, Capt. Latouch, in the Hermeone, sailed from
Newport harbor. The same day, the British frigate, the Flora, which was sunk
in Newport harbor nearly two years before, was weighed; she had a quantity of
provisions on board.

July 1st. -- News was received that the enemy were again in motion in the
Jersies.

2d. -- News was received of the sailing of the French fleet, which left France
the 2d of May. It was said in France, that if the fleet fell to the northward,
it would visit Halifax; if to the southward, it would proceed to Rhode Island.

A great uneasiness, at this time, prevailed in Ireland.

4th. -- The anniversary of American Independence was celebrated at Providence,
by a discharge of 13 cannon from the park. Governor Green, Monsieur de Corney,
and a number of other gentlemen, dined with our General.

By the last accounts, the main army was at Ramapaugh, in the Jersies. In the
skirmish, which happened some time before, near Springfield, the Americans had
about 40 killed and wounded.

11th. -- At one o'clock, A. M. our General received advice, by express, that
the fleet of our illustrious ally was seen off Newport, the evening before.
Before sunrise an express was sent forward to Genesis Washington with the
agreeable tidings, and our General immediately prepared to proceed to Newport,
but the day being calm, the packet did not reach the town until 12 o'clock at
night. General Rochambeau had gone on shore in the evening. Early the next
morning our General went on shore, and waited on the Count; from which moment
the warmest friendship commenced between our General, the Count, and all the
French officers. After breakfast, our General went on board the Duke de
Burgoyne man-of-war, to pay his respects to the Chevalier de Ternay, who
commanded the squadron, where the same friendship was commenced. The fleet
consisted of seven sail of the line, viz. the Duke de Burgoyne, of 80 guns; la
Neptune, la Conquerant of 74; la Jazen, la Seville, la Ardent, and la Provence
of 64; and the Fautasque of 64, armed enflute with 40 guns as a hospital ship;
two frigates, and two bombs, with a number of transports, having on board about
5,000 troops, besides the marines, the soldiers, and sailors, something sickly.
The joy in the town of Newport was great. At 11 o'clock, A. M. the Admiral
saluted the town with 13 cannon, which was returned by the discharge of the
same number. In the evening the town was beautifully illuminated, and fireworks
exhibited, to the great pleasure and satisfaction of our allies. The fleet, on
its passage to America, fell in with five British ships of the line, who, after
firing a few broad-sides, bore away.

12th. -- Our General dined with the Count de Rochambeau.

13th. -- The Chevalier de Ternay, and the principal officers of the squadron,
came on shore.

14th. -- Count de Rochambeau, and the General Officers of the French army,
dined with our General.

15th. -- A number of the Field-Officers of the French regiments, dined with
our General in the most happy fraternity.

18th. -- Four sail of ships of war, two of them supposed to be of 40 or 50
guns, appeared in the offing; they were supposed to be British. The same day,
the Chevalier de Ternay, and the principal officers of the fleet, dined with
our General. In the afternoon the remains of the officer, who was some time
before wounded on board the Hermeone, and died of those wounds, was interred
with military honors.

The missing transport of the fleet, with troops on board, arrived safe in
Boston harbor, and the troops marched to Rhode Island.

19th. -- Our General dined with the Count.

20th. -- The frigates of the squadron came to sail in the morning; but the
wind being ahead, they were obliged to come to anchor. Intelligence was
received that Admiral Greaves, with five or six sail of the line, arrived at
Sandy-Hook on the 13th.

On the 21st, in the afternoon, 15 or 16 sail of British ships of war appeared
in the offing; more than one half of them were supposed to be ships of the
line. At sunset, they appeared to be coming too under Block-Island. The
frigates, which attempted to get out in the morning, returned at evening.

Apprehending that the British fleet might be cruizing off, with a view to
intercept the second division of the French fleet, which was expected soon to
arrive, our General sent off expresses to headquarters, Boston and Hartford,
advising of the British fleet being off Newport -- that dispatch-boats might be
sent out to apprize the French, and point them to another port. Several works
and batteries, next to the harbor, were mantled with cannon.

22d. -- The British fleet were cruizing off all the day, and rather nearer
than they were the preceding day. Eighteen or nineteen sail were counted, eight
or nine of which appeared to be of the line. The French squadron kept their
former station, in the harbor, and in the most perfect readiness for action.
The army was in the same preparedness, and batteries so constructed as to
afford a heavy crossfire with the shipping, in the entrance of the harbor. All
vessels and boats were forbid passing out of the harbor in the night.

23d. -- The British were cruizing off -- early in the morning one of their
frigates was near in. Col. Greene's regiment of continental troops took post at
Butt's Hill, Bristol, and Howland's Ferries. Fifty French soldiers, from the
army, were sent on board each of the ships of the line. By accounts from
West-Point, it appeared that many recruits had joined, and were joining, the
American army.

24th. -- The British fleet continued off Newport. In the afternoon, 12 sail
were at anchor to the east of Block-Island, and 4 frigates cruizing between
that Island and Point Judith. In the evening, the Marquis de la Fayette came to
town, from headquarters.

25th. -- Intelligence was received, that Sir Henry Clinton intended an attempt
upon the French army, with 10,000 men; upon which 1500 of the militia of
Rhode Island, and Brigadier Godfrey's brigade of militia, of the county of
Bristol, in Massachusetts, were called in to Tiverton; and the three months'
men, who were destined to the main army, such of them as belonged to the
counties of Suffolk, Essex, Plymouth, Worcester, Barnstable and Bristol, were
ordered to march to Rhode Island.

26th. -- A confirmation of the intention of Sir Henry Clinton, against
Newport, was received from the neighborhood of New York. In consequence of
which, the whole militia of the State of Rhode Island was called in. Col.
Tyler's, Col. Perry's, and Maj. Bullard's militia regiments, in addition to
Brigadier Godfrey's, from Massachusetts. Signals were fixed as far as
Watch-Hill, and every thing put in train for the giving instant notice, both by
day and night, in case the enemy should approach toward the place.

27th. -- The wind being fresh at south-west, and the air hazy, the privateer
ship Washington, Capt. Munroe, ran by the British fleet, and passed up the
harbor. The stock on Conanicut-Island was ordered to be taken off. Howland's
Ferry was to be well secured on both sides.

30th. -- Intelligence was received, that the enemy's shipping, which were in
the Sound, and supposed to have taken in troops at Whitestone, had come to
sail, and stood to the westward; on which, the militia who were coming in,
except the three months' men, were permitted to return home. The militia had
discovered great zeal and alertness on the occasion. About noon, the British
ships that had been at anchor off Block-Island, came to sail and stood out to
sea.

The same day a brig, with dispatches from France, passed up the harbor; she
ran on one of the wrecks, and sunk immediately.

31st. -- Our General received letters from Genesis Washington, Genesis How, Genesis
Parsons, and Gov. Trumbull, intimating that the enemy intended an attack on
Newport; that about 150 sail of vessels were in the Sound; that about 8000
troops were to be employed on the expedition; and that Genesis Sir Henry Clinton
was to command in person; that 26 heavy cannon, some mortars, etc. were put on
board. In consequence of this intelligence, the militia were again called in.
The next day (August 1st) our General received the following letter from Genesis
Washington.

ROBINSON'S HOUSE, July 31, 1780. DEAR SIR,
I ARRIVED here last night; having met your favors of the 25th and 26th at
Paramus, where the army then lay. Immediately upon hearing that the transports,
with the troops, which had been some days on board, had sailed eastward, I put
the army in motion again; they will cross the ferry to day, and will be joined
by the troops from hence. I propose moving as rapidly as possible down toward
Kingsbridge, which will either oblige the enemy to abandon their project
against Rhode Island, or may afford us an opportunity of striking them to
advantage in this quarter, if Sir Henry Clinton has carried with him the number
of men reported (eight thousand) and with less than which, I think, he would
scarcely risk an attempt upon Count Rochambeau, reinforced by the militia.

I entirely approve of the measures you have taken for calling in aid, and have
the strongest hopes that if Sir Henry should venture upon an attack, that he
will meet a reception very different from what he expects. You know the
critical situation in which this army will be in a position below, and how much
depends upon constant intelligence of the motions of the enemy. I shall direct
relays of expresses the whole way, between this army and you, to convey
intelligence in the most expeditious manner. The nearest express to you will be
upon Tower Hill; and Genesis Green advises, that you should keep two whale-boats,
to communicate with him, by South-Ferry, so long as that passage shall be safe;
and if that should be interrupted, by Bissell's Harbor.

(Signed) GEO. WASHINGTON.
P.S. I wish the Count de Rochambeau had taken a position on the main.

G. W.




The militia came in with great spirit; they were formed into brigades, and
every disposition made for instant and vigorous defense, at every point where
it was supposed an attempt might be made. The batteries were strengthened, a
very strong one erected on Rose-Island, and redoubts on Coaster's-Island: the
strong works on Butt's-Hill pushed: avenues across the fields, by the shortest
routes, were opened, from the encampment of the French army, to those points
where their instant presence was judged necessary; and such marks fixed, at
small distances from each other, as to prevent any mistake in the route, either
by day or night; indeed, no one precaution was omitted, or probable advantage
of ground or situation neglected. Had Sir Henry made the attempt which he
menaced, he would undoubtedly have met a warm reception; but for some reason or
other he gave up his design, and the militia were again sent home. Perhaps on
no occasion did the militia discover more ardour, in pressing to the field, or
more regularity when there, than at that time, which was every where testified
by the inhabitants.

Our General had expressed a wish to the Commander in Chief, to join the main
army, that he might enjoy that command, to which he was at that time entitled,
viz. the right wing; to which Genesis Washington, in a letter dated August 3d,
replied:

As to your coming on to the army immediately, I shall leave it entirely to
yourself to act in the affair as you please. Your command is, and will always
be ready for you; however, if you find your presence where you are necessary,
and that it will contribute to the accommodation of our allies, and to the
cultivation of harmony, (matters about which I am very anxious) it may possibly
be more eligible for you to remain longer, as we shall not probably have any
instant active operations. But, as I have already said, do in the matter as you
like, and as circumstances may decide.

And in a subsequent letter some days after, he observed: "As to your wishes to
join the army, as I observed before, your aid may be very material to the
Count; and as we have no prospect of immediate active operations, I would
rather wish you to remain with him longer. I thought it essential in the first
instance that there should be an officer of rank sent to him; and a variety of
reasons concurred to induce me to believe that you would answer the important
objects I had in view, as well at least as any I could choose. I have not been
disappointed in the least in my expectation, and the Count himself judges your
continuing very essential, and expressed himself in the following manner upon
the subject several days ago. "I shall keep with me, if you think proper, Genesis
Heath, whose ardour, spirit, and activity, are absolutely necessary to me." For
these several considerations, I wish you to reconcile yourself to remaining
with him a while, which will be the more easy, when you consider that you will
be fully advertised whenever we are in a situation to attempt any thing
offensive on a great scale, and will have your command."

The British ship of war, the Galetea, appeared off Dartmouth. The British
fleet went to Gardner's Bay, excepting the frigates, which cruized off. The
troops continued fortifying the island.

15th. -- The British fleet sailed from Gardner's Bay to the eastward. About
this time, Maj. Genesis Green resigned the Quartermaster Generalship, and Col.
Pickering was appointed to that office.

19th. -- In the afternoon, the British again appeared off the harbor of
Newport. A few days before, the Continental frigate Alliance arrived at Boston,
in five weeks and four days from France, and brought news that there had been a
great mob in England, headed by Lord George Gordon, and that the prisons, etc.
had been pulled down.

23d. -- The privateer ship Washington, Capt. Talbot, of 20 guns, came down the
river, saluted the Commodore, and came to anchor.

24th. -- The French army, joined by the Americans, fired salutes on account of
its being St. Louis' day. The fleet fired on the next day.

The enemy were preparing for an embarkation of troops at New York; their
destination unknown.

The evening of the 20th, three or four of the enemy's cruizers were off the
harbor.

26th. -- The British fleet, to the number of more than 20 sail, were in the
Vineyard Sound.

29th. -- A number of Indians from the northwestern tribes came to Newport to
pay their respects to the General of the army of their father the King of
France. They had a hearty welcome, a treat, and presents, and were much
pleased. They were also invited by our General to a sumptuous treat. After
dinner, they performed their war dance before the officers of the armies, to
the great satisfaction of those of the French, who had not seen the like
before. The next day, the French troops were under arms, maneuvered, and fired,
in presence of the Indians, who were much pleased.

31st. -- Information was received that Admiral Arbuthnot was near the Vineyard
with nine sail of the line, eight other ships of war of different force, and
two tenders; that he had made a demand of 11,000 lb. of beef and mutton, to be
delivered every other day, at five pence per lb. The inhabitants remonstrating
against furnishing so large a quantity, the Admiral assured them that in case
they voluntarily delivered as much as their ability would allow, he would
dispense with what might be wanting.

The enemy continued their preparations for some grand enterprise, which could
not be developed.

September 10th. -- The British fleet were returned again to Gardner's Bay, and
their old station between Long Island and Block Island.

11th. -- Intelligence was received that on the 16th ult. Major General Gates
was totally defeated by the British, at or near Camden, in South Carolina. The
Maryland line suffered greatly, and Maj. Genesis Baron de Calb was wounded, of
which wounds he died.

14th. -- Intelligence was received, that Brig. Genesis Poor, of New Hampshire,
died at camp on the 8th, of a putrid fever; and that Brig. Genesis Nixon had
resigned his commission. Genesis Sir Henry Clinton was holding a body of troops,
said to be about 6,000, in readiness to embark at New York, said to be destined
to the southward. The 17th, in the morning, the Continental regiment, commanded
by Colonel Green, crossed over from the island to Greenwich, from whence they
were to march to the main army.

21st. -- Intelligence was received that Admiral Rodney arrived at Sandy Hook
on the 13th, with ten sail of the line, and two frigates -- that on the 15th,
Commodore Drake, with four sail of the line, was detached from the Hook to join
Admiral Arbuthnot near Gardner's Island, and that these four ships joined on
the 18th. This junction was intended to intercept 12 sail of French men-of-war,
which were expected to be coming from the West Indies to Rhode Island -- that
the 76th and 80th British regiments, one Hessian regiment, the Queen's Rangers,
Fanning's corpse, a part of the horse, and all the British grenadiers and
light-infantry, were ordered to embark immediately at New York -- it was
conjectured for Virginia. The disposition of the British troops at that time
was said to be as follows: the 22d, 76th British, 3 Hessian regiments,
Robinson's corpse, and some artillery in the city -- Highland emigrants, at
Brooklyn -- a few invalids at Newton -- one regiment of Hessians at Jamaica --
the 37th, 38th and 43d British, one Hessian regiment, one yauger, one
grenadier, and one light-infantry from Jamaica to Flushing -- about three
regiments at Whitestone -- Queen's Rangers, Oyster Bay -- Fanning's regiment,
the 3d regiment of Delaney's, and the Jersey volunteers, Lloyd's Neck -- Col.
Abercrombie, with about 600 infantry, at Huntington -- the 17th dragoons at
Smithtown -- about 1500 men from Haarlem to Kingsbridge. At this time, the
Count de Rochambeau and Admiral de Ternay had an interview with Genesis
Washington, at Hartford.

22d. -- Col. Greene's regiment was ordered to return from Greenwich to the
island. The French army continued very busy in fortifying Rhode Island: some of
their works were exceedingly strong, and mounted with heavy metal.

24th. -- In the evening, Genesis Rochambeau and the Admiral returned to
Rhode Island.

30th. -- A French frigate arrived at Newport from the West Indies, but brought
no news of consequence. The Count de Guichen, instead of coming this way with
the fleet from the West Indies, was going or gone for Europe.

While General Washington was in interview with General Rochambeau at Hartford,
Maj. Genesis Arnold, who had the immediate command of West-Point, was playing a
most traitorous game with the British, for the delivery of that important post
into their hands -- which was communicated to our General by the Commander in
Chief, in the following letter.

ROBINSON'S HOUSE, Sept. 26, 1780. DEAR SIR,
IN the present situation of things, I think it necessary that you should join
the army; and request that you will do it. You will come to headquarters
yourself. The route through Litchfield will be the most eligible for you, on
account of security; and you may direct your baggage to halt at Fish-Kill, for
your further orders. I write to the Count de Rochambeau by this conveyance; and
I trust that your coming away now, will not be attended with any material
inconvenience to him.

I cannot conclude, without informing you of an event which has happened here,
which will strike you with astonishment and indignation: -- Maj. Genesis Arnold
has gone to the enemy. He had had an interview with Major Andre,
Adjutant-General of the British army, and had put into his possession a state
of the army of the garrison at this post, of the number of men considered as
necessary for the defense of it; a return of the ordnance, and the disposition
of the artillery corpse, in case of an alarm. By a most providential
interposition, Major Andre was taken in returning to New York, with all these
papers in Genesis Arnold's handwriting; who, hearing of the matter, kept it to
himself, left his quarters immediately, under pretext of going over to West
Point, on Monday forenoon, about an hour before my arrival; then pushed down
the river in the barge, which was not discovered till I had returned from
West-Point in the afternoon, and when I received the first information of Mr.
Andre's capture. Measures were instantly taken to apprehend him; but, before
the officers sent for the purpose could reach Verplank's Point, he had passed
it with a flag, and got on board the Vulture ship of war, which lay a few miles
below. He knew of my approach, and that I was visiting, with the Marquis, the
north and middle redoubts; and from this circumstance, was so straitened in
point of time, that I believe he carried with him but very few, if any,
material papers; though he has a very precise knowledge of the (...) of the
post. The gentlemen of Genesis Arnold's (...), I have the greatest reason to
believe, were not privy in the least degree to the measure he was carrying on,
or to his escape.

(Signed) G. WASHINGTON.


Genesis Arnold's panic was so great, when he found that the plot was discovered,
that he called out for a horse, any horse that first came to hand, if it were a
waggon-horse; upon the horse's being brought, the General mounted, and, instead
of passing to the landing by the usual path, he rode down a steep bank, where
it seemed impossible for a horse with a rider to get down, without being
unhorsed.

When Arnold had passed Verplank's Point, and had got under the guns of the
Vulture, he told Corporal Larvey, who was Cockswain of the barge, that he was
going on board the ship, and that he should not return; that if he (Larvey)
would stay with him, he should have a commission in the British service. To
this, Larvey, who was a smart fellow, replied, that he would be d -- d if he
fought on both sides; the General replied, that he would send him on shore.
Arnold then told the barge crew, that if any or all of them would stay with
him, they should be treated well; but if they declined staying, they should be
sent on shore. One or two staid, the rest, with the Cockswain, were sent on
shore in the ship's boat; the barge was kept. Larvey, for his fidelity, was
made a Sergeant. He thought he had merited more; that he ought to have had as
much as Arnold promised him. He continued uneasy, until at his repeated request
he was allowed to leave the army.

Maj. Andre, on his return toward New York, fell in with three young men below
the lines, John Paulding, David Williams, and Isaac Van Vert; they did not at
first know that Andre was a British officer, and he was at a loss whether they
were British, refugees, or staunch Americans. There was consequently a little
finesse exhibited on both sides; but at length it was fully discovered who
Andre was. He then attempted to bribe the young men, by offering them a large
sum of money; but their fidelity was too great to be purchased. They brought
him up, and delivered him to the Americans, where he was tried, sentenced, and
hanged as a spy. The British General on the river endeavored to save his life,
first by threats, and then by persuasions; but all was in vain. Maj. Andre's
behavior, until the time of his execution, was becoming an officer and a
gentleman; and such, in his last moments, as drew tears from many eyes. But it
must be remembered, that he who consents to become a spy, when he sets out, has
by allusion a halter put round his neck, and that by the usage of armies, if he
be taken, the other end of the halter is speedily made fast to a gallows.

Congress, pleased with the conduct of John Paulding, David Williams, and Isaac
Van Vert, passed a resolution, on the 4th of October, directing that 200
dollars, in specie, should be annually paid to them, during life; and that a
silver medal, descriptive of their fidelity, with the thanks of Congress,
should be presented to each of them.

The situation of the British army, and other circumstances, at the moment
Andre was detected, were such as render it highly probable, that if he had not
been taken, the most serious consequences to the American cause would very soon
have taken place.

October 1st. -- The next day after our General received the letter from Genesis
Washington, he took a most affectionate leave of the French officers, and left
Newport, to prepare to go on to the army. His waggon-horses were out in the
country at a distance; these were to be brought in, shod, etc. and other
preparations to be made, which prevented his leaving Providence until the
afternoon of the 9th, when he was attended out of town by a number of officers
and other gentlemen. Before he left Providence, he bid Count Rochambeau another
farewell, by letter, to which an answer was forwarded on after him, as follows:

NEWPORT, Oct. 12, 1780. MY DEAR GENERAL,
I HAVE received the letter that you honored me with from Providence. I am
extremely sensible of the marks of friendship that you give me, and likewise
very grateful for all that your good heart has dictated to you upon the
occasion of our present separation. I regret vastly your absence, my dear
General, as well as all the army; and I shall never forget the zeal, the
activity, and the intelligence, with which you helped us in all our operations;
and the French army will always be most grateful for it. I have the honor to
be, with the most inviolable attachment, my dear General,

your most obedient and humble servant, (Signed) LE COUNT DE ROCHAMBEAU.


16th. -- Our General reached West-Point, where he met the following letter
from Genesis Washington.

HEADQUARTERS, NEAR PASSAICK FALLS, Oct. 14, 1780. DEAR SIR,
IN my letter of the 26th ult. by which I requested you to rejoin the army, I
desired that you would come yourself to headquarters: I am now to request that
you will proceed to West-Point, and take upon you the command of that post and
its dependencies. Maj. Genesis Green, who is at present there, will either
communicate to you himself, or leave with Genesis M'Dougal to be transferred, the
instructions he received respecting the post; to which you will be pleased to
attend. If this should not find you at West-Point, it is my wish that you
should arrive there as soon as circumstances will possibly admit; and I hope
there will be nothing to delay it.

(Signed) G. WASHINGTON.


Our General had scarcely entered on the command, before he received
intelligence that the enemy were making an incursion upon the northern frontier
of New York; upon which he immediately, without consulting the Commander in
Chief, ordered Col. Gansevoort's regiment to their relief, and communicated
what he had done to headquarters; to which he received the following answer:

HEADQUARTERS, PREKANESS, 16th Oct. 1780. DEAR SIR,
I AM favored with yours of yesterday, accompanied by a letter from his
Excellency Governor Clinton, who gives me an account of the incursion upon the
frontiers. I am happy that you detached Gansevoort's regiment immediately; you
will be pleased to order either Weisenfeld's or Willet's, as you may judge
proper, to follow, and take orders from the Governor or the commanding officer.
This is all the force I think we ought to detach from the posts, until the
views of the enemy are more fully ascertained. They put off the long expected
embarkation strangely. They had not sailed the 13th. and it was then said the
expedition was delayed for some purpose. The number under orders, by estimate,
are about 2,000, or something upwards. If the militia should not have been
discharged, when this reaches you, you will be pleased to detain about 500, to
make up for the detachment you have sent up the river. I have received yours
of the 13th, as I have done that enclosing the estimates, for which I am much
obliged. You will be pleased to carry into execution what you proposed,
respecting the posts at Stoney and Verplank's Points.

(Signed) G. WASHINGTON.


This was followed by another, dated the 18th, in which the Commander in Chief
observed, "I am glad to find, by your letter of the 17th, that you were arrived
at West-Point, and had taken the command of that important post." This was
occasioned by our General's having been on the east side of the river a day or
two, until the quarters on the point were quitted by Maj. Genesis Green, who was
ordered to the southward.

On the 17th, intelligence was received, that the enemy had advanced to Fort
George and Fort Ann, both of which had fallen into their hands; that after
destroying the works, and burning about thirty houses, and as many barns, they
had gone back; but it was apprehended that they would advance again.

19th. -- Maj. Genesis Green left West-Point. The same day intelligence was
received, that on the 16th the long talked of embarkation of troops sailed from
New York, supposed to be destined to the southward. The American troops at this
time drove up the fat cattle which were near the lines, in consequence of a
warrant from Gov. Clinton.

21st. -- Intelligence was received, that the enemy were meditating an
excursion as far up as Crompond and its vicinity, to sweep off all the cattle.
Our General immediately ordered Col. Hazen, with a detachment of 500 men, to
move to Pine's Bridge, and Lieut. Col. Jameson, with the 2d light dragoons, to
move from Bedford toward Col. Hazen. The detachment arrived at Pine's Bridge
about 10 o'clock the same evening, and Col. Jameson with the dragoons at about
2 o'clock the next morning. The evening of the 23d, Col. Hazen returned with
the detachment; the enemy did nor come out.

About this time, the enemy received a small reinforcement at New York, from
England, said to be 1,500 or 2,000. Two or three very valuable prizes, laden
with rum, sugar, etc. were sent into Philadelphia, and news was received that
upwards of 50 sail of British East and West Indiamen, outward bound, were taken
by the combined fleets of France and Spain, near Cape Finister.

24th. -- Intelligence was received, that the enemy had laid waste a great part
of the fertile country above Saratoga, and to the westward of Schenectady. The
same night, 20 prisoners made their escape from the provost at Fish-Kill, by
digging upwards of 20 feet under ground; parties were sent out after them in
different directions, and some of them were retaken.

26th. -- News was received, that the militia, under Genesis Van Rensselaer,
obtained a considerable advantage over the enemy at the northward, on the 19th
instant, at the Fox Mills. The action lasted for some hours; the enemy left
their baggage, prisoners, etc. Col. Brown was killed in skirmishing with the
enemy on the morning of the same day.

28th. -- Official intelligence was received of a signal advantage gained by
the Americans in North Carolina over a corpse of fourteen hundred men, British
troops, and new levies, commanded by Col. Ferguson. The militia of the
neighboring country under Colonels Williams and Shelby, and others having
assembled to the number of 3,000, detached 1,600 men on horseback, to fall in
with Ferguson's party on its march to Charlotte -- they came up with them at a
place called King's Mountain, advantageously posted, and gave them a total
defeat, in which Col. Ferguson, with 150 of his men were killed, 800 made
prisoners, and 1,500 stands of arms taken, with but inconsiderable loss,
except, and greatly to be regretted, the brave Col. Williams, who was supposed
to be mortally wounded. A second account stated the enemy's whole loss in
killed, wounded and prisoners, at 1,105; and that of the Americans in killed
and wounded, 64.

29th. -- Brig. Genesis James Clinton was ordered to Albany, to take the command
in that quarter.

30th. -- Capt. Johnson, with a detachment consisting of 100 men, marched to do
duty on the lines for the protection of the inhabitants against the enemy, and
the cow-boys, (so called) a set of plundering thieves.

31st. -- A ridiculous proclamation of the traitor Arnold, made its appearance;
he styled himself a Brigadier-General, and invited the officers and soldiers of
the American army to join him, promising ample encouragement, etc. but it had
no effect.

November 1st. -- A severe storm of snow and rain. The brave soldiers who were
but illy clad, and destitute of blankets, were in a shivering condition.

The devastation committed by the enemy at the northward, was found to be very
great; at least 200 dwellings and 150,000 bushels of wheat, with a proportion
of other grain and forage, were supposed to have been destroyed; had not the
pursuit after the enemy been very rapid, the devastations would have been much
greater.

The American army were at this time experiencing a great want of flour, which
they bore with their usual patience.

4th. -- Intelligence was received, that Maj. Carleton, after being reinforced
with 500 men, was returning toward Skeensborough; it was supposed that his
force had increased to about 1,600, and further depredations on the frontiers
were expected. The militia of the upper counties were again ordered out by Gov.
Clinton.

The same day, the new arrangement of the army was published. The encouragement
to both officers and soldiers was generous.

5th. -- The troops were again without bread. Intelligence was received that
the enemy had landed a body of troops at Portsmouth, in Virginia, and that
another embarkation was talked of at New York.

6th. -- News was received from Boston, that his Excellency John Hancock had
been chosen Governor of the State of Massachusetts -- the first Governor under
the new constitution. The same day, intelligence was received from the
northward, that the enemy had crossed Lake George the Thursday before, and
advanced to Fort Edward, the small garrison of which abandoned the fort on the
approach of the enemy, whose numbers were said to be about 800. The militia
were out, and the 1st and 5th New York regiments were ordered to embark and
sail for Albany immediately. They sailed early on the morning of the 9th. On
the same day, intelligence was received, that the enemy had lately made an
excursion to the upper parts of Connecticut river, and destroyed a number of
houses at Royalton. The militia turned out with spirit, repulsed and pursued
them; the enemy made off with precipitation, leaving their plunder, etc. behind
them. Upwards of 2,000 militia were assembled in that quarter.

The 2d regiment of dragoons moved from Bedford to North-Castle.

The enemy published several letters in the New York papers, which were taken
from the Fish-Kill post-rider not long before at Stratford; in particular, one
from the general officers belonging to the New England States to their several
Legislatures.

A partial but not general exchange of prisoners took place about this time.
Maj. Genesis Lincoln was exchanged for Maj. Genesis Phillips; General Thompson, and a
number of American officers, who had long been prisoners, were also exchanged.

14th. -- The great chain, which was laid across the Hudson at West-Point, was
taken up for the winter; it was done under the direction of Colonel Govion,
Capt. Buchanan, and Capt. Nevers, with a strong detachment of the garrison, and
with skill and dexterity. This chain was as long as the width of the river
between West-Point and Constitution Island, where it was fixed to great blocks
on each side, and under the fire of batteries on both sides of the river. The
links of this chain were probably 12 inches wide, and 18 inches long; the iron
about 2 inches square. This heavy chain was buoyed up by very large logs of
perhaps 16 or more feet long, a little pointed at the ends, to lessen their
opposition to the force of the water on flood and ebb. The logs were placed at
short distances from each other, the chain carried over them, and made fast to
each by staples, to prevent their shifting; and there were a number of anchors
dropped at distances, with cables made fast to the chain, to give it a greater
stability. The short bend of the river at this place was much in favor of the
chain's proving effectual; for a vessel, coming up the river with the fairest
wind and strongest way, must lose them on changing her course to turn the
point; and before she could get under any considerable way again, even if the
wind was fair, she would be on the chain, and at the same time under a heavy
shower of shot and shells.

15th. -- The 1st and 5th New York regiments returned from Albany, the enemy
having returned to Canada, except about 400 men, chiefly British, who were
encamped about 10 miles below Crown-Point. Provisions were extremely scarce at
Albany.

The night of the 16th, a number of the boats were stove by the violence of the
wind and storm.

On the morning of the 18th, five large slat-bottomed boats, under the charge
of a Subaltern and 25 picked watermen, were sent down the river to the slote
above Dobb's-Ferry, where they were to be placed on carriages, and transported
to a certain place, for an enterprise which was meditating against the enemy.

19th. -- Five companies, of 50 men each, marched from West-Point, for the
purpose of impressing teams in the upper part of Westchester, and lower parts
of Duchess Counties, preparatory to the grand forage.

The same day, the invalids of the Massachusetts and Connecticut lines, and a
detachment of able bodied men, the whole about 1000, arrived at West-Point,
from the main army.

20th. -- Three light fieldpieces, with four ammunition tumbrels, with
ammunition for the artillery, and musquet-cartridges; and also a quantity of
hard bread, rum, etc. was sent down to Peek's-Kill, for the use of the grand
foragers.

21st. -- The troops destined for the grand forage paraded between Nelson's
Point and the church. Just before they marched, Chevalier Chastellux, Major
General in the French army, at Newport, and some other French officers,
arrived; the detachment defiled before them, and proceeded for the lines. The
French officers were much pleased with the appearance of the troops.

Genesis Chastellux then accompanied our General over to the Point, and on landing
was saluted by the discharge of 13 cannon; after dinner, he took a view of
Forts Clinton, Putnam, Willis, etc. At evening Count Noailles, Count Damas, and
Maj. Duplissis, arrived at the Point. The next morning, about 9 o'clock, Genesis
Chastellux, and the other French officers, amidst a severe cold storm of rain,
embarked on board the barge, and went down the river, to King's Ferry, on their
way to headquarters; on leaving West-Point, they were again saluted by 13
cannon.

The evening of the 22d, Brig. Genesis Starks arrived at Wright's Mills, and the
wagons were collected at North-Castle. This grand forage was to mask an
enterprise, which was to have been attempted by Genesis Washington, from the main
army; although the foraging was in itself an important object. The enterprise,
for some reasons, was not attempted, but the grand forage was very successful.
Some of the light troops went as low down as East-Chester; and on the 27th,
Genesis Starks returned with a large quantity of corn, some hay, cattle, etc.

The next day, the main army separated to move into winter quarters, and the
light-infantry corpse was broken up for the winter, and the men ordered to join
their respective regiments. The corpse of light-infanty was perhaps as fine a
body of men as was ever formed. Major General the Marquis de la Fayette had,
with infinite pains and great expense, endeavored to render them respectable
in their appearance as well as discipline, in which he was nobly seconded by
the officers: it was a pity that the operations of the campaign did not afford
an opportunity for the Marquis to signalize himself with this corpse.

30th. -- The New Jersey brigade left West-Point, proceeding down on the west
side of the Hudson, on their way to Pompton, where they took winter quarters.
In the afternoon, the four Massachusetts brigades arrived at West-Point, and
the two Connecticut brigades on the east side of the river, where the whole
took winter quarters.

A few days before, viz. on the 23d, Maj. Talmadge, with a detachment from the
2d regiment of dragoons, conducted with great address an enterprise against the
enemy's Fort, St. George, on Long Island. Fort St. George was stockaded, and
encompassed a large spot of ground, a square redoubt, with a ditch and abbatis.
The enterprise succeeded completely. One half-pay Lieutenant Colonel, 1
half-pay Captain, 1 Subaltern, and 50 rank and file, were made prisoners. The
fort was destroyed and burnt. Two armed vessels burnt, and a large magazine of
hay, said to be about 300 tons, was destroyed.

December 1st. -- One of the largest scows at King's Ferry, in crossing, with
several baggage wagons on board, sunk.

The same day, our General began to discharge the six-months men, beginning
with those who were the worst clothed and unfit for duty.

4th. -- The three New York regiments sailed for Albany, where they were to
take winter quarters.

5th. -- Marquis la Val, Count de Custin, and Col. Fleury, of the French army
at Newport, arrived at West-Point, on a visit.

6th. -- At evening his Excellency Genesis Washington, arrived at New-Windsor,
where he took winterquarters. The same evening, accounts were received that
there had been a terrible hurricane in the West Indies.

On the evening of the 9th, Genesis Varnum and Col. Pickering, arrived at
West-Point; at this time the troops were without bread, and very uneasy. The
next day, 300 barrels of flour arrived. A little before noon, Genesis Washington
visited West-Point.

12th. -- Intelligence was received from New York, that another embarkation was
to take place, and that Genesis Phillips and Genesis Arnold were to command. Major
Talmadge received the thanks of Congress for his good conduct in taking Fort
St. George.

17th. -- An express from Major Maxwell on the lines, brought up intelligence
that the enemy at Morrissania, under Col. Delancy, were preparing for an
enterprise. The Major was cautioned to be on his guard.

18th. -- News was received that Monsieur de Sartine, the primate of France,
had been removed -- Mr. D'Castries appointed.

19th. -- News was received that the Hon. Henry Laurens, who was sent on a
mission to Holland, had been taken by the British, carried into England, and
closely confined. The British government talked of sending to America a large
reinforcement for the next campaign.

20th. -- Further intelligence having been received that Col. Delancy intended
to visit our troops on the lines, in order to give him a proper reception, 150
men were ordered from the New Hampshire line, to march to Crom-Pond.

21st. -- Intelligence was received that on the preceding Friday, the
transports which had taken the troops on board at New York, fell down to the
watering place. They were to be convoyed by one 50 gun ship and two frigates.

On the night of the 9th, Major Hugerford, of Delancy's corpse, surprised and
took prisoners Lieut. Col. Wells, of a Connecticut State regiment, who was
stationed near Horseneck, with one Captain, two Lieutenants, two Ensigns, and
upwards of twenty privates.

23d. -- Intelligence was received that Monsieur, the Chevalier de Ternay,
Admiral of the French squadron at Newport, had died there.

The troops on the lines were reinforced with 50 men, and Lieut. Col. Hull was
appointed to the command on the lines.

27th. -- The Free and Accepted Masons of Washington Lodge celebrated the feast
of St. John, at Starkean Hall, on West-Point.

30th. -- Genesis Washington visited the Point, and, with a number of other
officers, dined with our General.

On the 25th inst. Major Humphries, Aid-de-camp to the Commander in Chief, went
toward New York on an enterprise; he was attended by Capt. Wells, of the
Connecticut line, Lieut. Heart, Ensign M'Calpin, Mr. Buchanan, Mr. M'Guyer, and
twenty-four non-commissioned officers and privates, in one barge and two
whale-boats. The wind was very fresh at north-west in the night, and the boats
were forced past the city, and one of them almost down to Sandy-Hook -- one of
the boats put in at Staten Island: at length the three went round to Brunswick,
from whence the Major and all the others, returned to the army on the 1st of
January.

31st. -- On the evening of the 29th, a party of the enemy from Delancy's
corpse, consisting of about 100 infantry and 50 horse, came up to North-Castle,
where, after a short halt, they proceeded toward Bedford New Purchase. Capt.
Pritchard, who was posted at Bedford with a company of continental troops, and
some militia, immediately advanced toward them, attacked their van, who
retreated, as did their main body. Capt. Pritchard pursued them as far as
Young's. It was said that one of the enemy was killed and several wounded, who
were carried off in a wagon. Four oxen and between 30 and 40 sheep were
retaken -- eight or ten head of cattle were driven off: the Captain sustained
no injury.

This day the enemy were out again: Col. Hull immediately marched down with his
whole force to meet them; by his vigilance they were prevented from doing any
mischief, and on his advance, retired toward the saw-pits.

1781. January 1st. -- The Pennsylvania line mutinied almost to a man, seized
the artillery, broke open the magazines of ammunition and provisions, took out
what they judged necessary, and took up their line of march. The officers
exerted themselves, both by threats and persuasion, to reduce them to order;
but all was in vain. They were told that the enemy might take the advantage of
their conduct, and come out -- they answered, that if the enemy came out, they
would immediately put themselves under the command of their office, and fight
them; but that in any other case they would not be commanded. They took Genesis
Wayne's horses out of his stable, and put them to draw the fieldpieces. At
night they encamped, posting out pickets, guards, and planting sentinels in a
very regular manner. An alarm was given to the country by firing the beacons,
etc. and the militia were assembling. The reasons given for the revolt, were
the intolerable sufferings of the army -- the want of pay, of which 11 months
was due -- the want of clothing, many of the troops being almost naked -- the
want of provisions, and that many of them were held beyond the term of their
enlistment. They directed their march toward Philadelphia, determined to
demand redress of their grievances of Congress.

7th. -- Maj. Genesis Knox was sent off by the Commander in Chief to the eastern
States, to represent the alarming situation and sufferings of the army.

8th. -- Major Throop, with 100 men, was sent toward Pompton, in the Jersies,
to cover the public stores, at Ringwood. In the afternoon, 169 barrels of flour
arrived at the Point.

11th. -- His Excellency the Commander in Chief came down to West-Point, when a
Council of War was held at our General's quarters, in which all the General
Officers on the ground, and all the Colonels and commanding officers of
regiments sat, to consider what measures were necessary to be adopted, with
respect to the Pennsylvania line. After the Council, by order of the Commander
in Chief, our General issued orders for the forming of five battalions, by
detachment from the several lines, to be held in the most perfect readiness to
march on the shortest notice, with four days provisions cooked. The mutineers
remained on the heights of Princetown, and two emissaries were sent out to them
from the enemy, with offers, in writing, promising to redress their grievances,
by discharging them from their enlistments, paying all their arrearages of pay
and depreciation, and exempting them from serving in the British army, if they
should choose it. The mutineers nobly disdained these offers, and gave up the
emissaries and their papers: they were tried, and hanged as spies; the one was
an inhabitant of New Jersey, the other was a British Sergeant. Genesis Sir Henry
Clinton and Genesis Knyphausen were said to have been on Staten Island. The State
appointed a Committee to inquire into the grounds of the complaints of the
mutineers, and to redress such as appeared to have foundation: this brought the
business to a close. A number of the soldiers were discharged, the rest
returned to their duty.

Accounts were received from the southward, that the American army in that
quarter were in a most miserable condition, on account of clothing and
provisions, and that their sufferings were greater than those experienced by
the main army. These sufferings of the army were rendered the keener, by the
return of the officers and soldiers from furlough, who had been in the great
seaport towns, where every necessary and luxury of life were enjoyed, in the
greatest abundance, many tables groaning under the pressure of the dainties
with which they were covered. Their liquors were not only the best, but also of
great variety. Such reports to men, standing sentinel, as it were, in the jaws
of death, ill clad, cold and hungry, with nothing but water oftentimes to
drink, were trials almost too great for human nature to bear. The old
Continental currency was fixed at 75 for one, at Philadelphia.

13th. -- The Marquis de la Fayette and Count Deuxponts visited West-Point.

17th. -- Intelligence was received, that the troops which some time before
sailed from New York, were in the Chesapeak, under the command of Genesis Arnold,
and supposed to be on a plundering expedition.

The enemy at New York removed the greater part of their shipping from the East
River round into the North River.

18th. -- Two hundred men, properly officered, marched down to the lines, under
pretense of being a relief; 100 men of Hazen's regiment moved from Fishkill, to
the village, and a detachment of artillety from West-Point. These were intended
for an enterprise against the enemy.

19th. -- 150 men from the Connecticut line, and 200 from the New Hampshire
line, were to move toward the lines; these, with those who marched from
Hazen's the day before, were to form a covering party to the detachment under
Lieut. Col. Hull, who was to make an attempt on Delancy's corpse.

21st. -- A letter was received from Major Throop, at Ringwood, stating, that
the evening before, the Jersey line, at Pompton, had revolted, and it was
supposed would be joined by the other part of the line, who were at Chatham.
Their intentions had not been developed.

22d. -- His Excellency Genesis Washington, the Marquis de la Fayette, and a
number of French gentlemen, visited the Point. The same day, 500 rank and file,
properly officered from the Massachusetts, Connecticut, and New Hampshire
lines, were detached, and ordered to march the next day, under the command of
Maj. Genesis How, to establish order and discipline in the Jersies.

23d. -- The detachment marched from West-Point for the Jersies. The battalion
from thence was commanded by Col. Sprout. The troops on the east side of the
river were to cross, and join those from the Point, at King's-Ferry: the
detachment marched in high spirits.

24th. -- In the morning, about sunrise, a noise was heard in the air,
resembling the firing of platoons, and there were various conjectures
respecting it. Intelligence was received, that Genesis Arnold had gone up James
River, in Virginia, and had taken possession of Williamsburg, and was moving
toward Richmond; that he met with but little opposition, and would probably
plunder large quantities of tobacco and other articles.

28th. -- The detachment, under the command of Lieut. Col. Hull, returned from
the enterprise against the enemy at Morrissania. The address and gallantry of
the officers, the bravery and patience of the troops, exhibited on the
occasion, did them much honor. Besides a number of the enemy who were killed,
upwards of fifty were made prisoners; the Pontoon Bridge was cut away, the huts
and forage were burnt, and a large number of cattle driven up. Of the
detachment, one Ensign, one drummer, and ten rank and file, were killed; one
Captain, one Sergeant, and eleven rank and file wounded; six rank and file were
missing.

31st. -- Maj. Genesis How returned with the detachment from the Jersies; order
was established among the troops in that quarter: two of the ringleaders in the
revolt were executed. It was learnt, that considerable damage was done to the
enemy's shipping, at New York, by the high gusts of wind, on the night of the
23d. It was also said, that a British 74 gun ship was dismasted, off
New London; another struck a reef, and a third went out to sea with one of her
masts lost.

February 12th. -- The Duke de Lauzun, Count Pherson and Col. Sheldon, of the
French army, visited West-Point.

13th. -- Intelligence was received, that on the 17th ultimo, an action
happened near Pedee, in Carolina, between a body of the enemy, under Lieut.
Col. Tarleton, and a body of about 800 Americans, under the command of Genesis
Morgan: the enemy were totally routed, and pursued upwards of 20 miles. Of the
enemy, 10 officers and 100 rank and file were killed, and 200 wounded; 29
officers and 500 rank and file were taken prisoners, with two fieldpieces, 2
standards, 800 muskets, 35 wagons, 70 negroes, 100 dragoon-horses, one
travelling-forge, and all their music. The loss of the Americans was not more
than 12 killed, and 60 wounded.

14th. -- Genesis Warner and Col. Ashley, of Massachusetts, arrived at West-Point,
to distribute to the soldiers of the Massachusetts line, engaged to serve
during the war, 24 dollars, in specie, each, as a generous gratuity from the
State. The most sensible soldiers did not applaud this measure, as it did not
assure to them the full payment of the wages due to them, while this boon
increased the burden of debt on the State.

16th. -- Count de St. Maim, of the French army, visited West-Point. The same
day, orders were issued for augmenting the light companies of all the regiments
at West-Point, and its dependencies, to 50 rank and file, each: they were to
rendezvous, the 18th or 19th, at Peek's Kill.

17th. -- The light companies were formed into battalions, in the following
order: the eight eldest companies of the Massachusetts line to form a
battalion, under the command of Col. Vose and Maj. Galvan; the two youngest
companies of that line, and those of Connecticut and Rhode Island, to form a
battalion, under the command of Col. Gamat and Maj. Throop; those of the
New Hampshire line, and Col. Hazen's regiment, and such others as might be
joined to them, to form a battalion. This appointment of officers, was declared
to be intended not to affect the general plan of arranging the light-infantry
for the campaign. The preceding morning, the enemy made an excursion from
Morrissania, toward Bedford, took Lieuts. Carpenter, Wright and Peacock, and
five other inhabitants, prisoners; burnt five houses, plundered and stripped
several other inhabitants, and returned. They were pursued by Capt. Pritchard,
but could not be overtaken.

18th. -- The light companies were inspected. It appeared that Admiral
Arbuthnot's squadron were so much damaged, in the storm, on the 23d ult. as to
be rendered inferior to the French, in these seas.

20th. -- A detachment of artillery was ordered from the park, to join the
light-infantry; the whole were to be commanded by the Marquis de la Fayette,
and were to march to the southward. The same day, six of our guides, on a
reconnoitring party, toward King's Bridge, fell in with a reconnoitring party
of Delancy's corpse: the guides attacked them, and took five prisoners, all of
whom were wounded.

24th. -- The detachment doing duty on the lines, was reduced to 50 rank and
file, properly officered. Capt. Paul Jones, who arrived in the Ariel, at
Philadelphia on the 17th, in eight weeks from L'Orient, brought a large
quantity of powder.

28th. -- Intelligence was received, that a considerable embarkation of troops
was taking place at New York -- the inhabitants and army in some consternation.
It was said that a fleet of French merchantmen had arrived in the Chesapeak;
but from appearances, there were good grounds to suspect that there was
something more than merchant ships.

March 1st. -- News was received, that a part of the French squadron, at
Newport, had sailed as far as the Chesapeak, where they took the Romulus, of 50
guns, and nine privateers and transports; four of the latter they destroyed,
not having spare men to navigate them; but the remainder, with the Romulus, had
safely arrived at Rhode Island.

On the morning of the 2d of March, Genesis Washington set out from New-Windsor,
for Rhode Island. By the last accounts from the southward, Lord Cornwallis was
advancing rapidly, and Genesis Green retreating moderately. His Lordship had
destroyed his wagons, and disengaged himself of encumbrance as much as
possible.

3d. -- A Capt. Simmons, of Delancy's corpse, was sent up to West-Point; he
asserted to be disaffected to the enemy on some pretenses, and that he had
resigned his commission, and deserted from them: he was sent to the Governor of
the State.

5th. -- Three prisoners were sent up; they were taken by a party of our
guides, within a small distance of the enemy's post, No. 8, near Morrissania.

6th and 7th. -- Col. Vanscaak's regiment of the New York line arrived at
West-Point, from Albany. The troops were at this time well supplied with
provisions, but almost totally destitute of forage, and subjected to great
fatigue in obtaining fuel, which part of the troops were obliged to bring on
their backs, nearly a mile.

9th. -- Intelligence was received, that the last embarkation of British troops
sailed from New York the preceding Wednesday, said to be six regiments, making
about 3,000 men in the whole. The southern militia had been successful against
the Cherokee Indians, and destroyed a number of their towns. The last advices
from the southward stated, that Lord Cornwallis had continued to push rapidly
after Genesis Green, who had crossed Dan River, and his Lordship had come up to
it, and then began to retreat; on which Genesis Green re-crossed the Dan, in
order to pursue him, and that the militia were collecting. Genesis Arnold kept
close at Portsmouth; Genesis Mecklenburgh was near him, with a superior force, and
the Marquis de la Fayette was as far as Elk on the 3d, with the light-infantry.

11th. -- A detachment of recruits from Massachusetts arrived. The same day,
Capt. Pray was ordered to take command of the Block-House, at Dobb's Ferry, the
water-guards, etc.

On the first of this month, the Confederation and perpetual Union of the
Thirteen American States, from New Hampshire to Georgia, inclusive, was signed
and ratified by all the Delegates in Congress.

On the evening of the 12th, intelligence was received from Capt. Pray, that at
about two o'clock in the morning, he was alarmed by the firing of guns, blowing
of horns, etc. -- that the enemy were out on both sides of the river. In
consequence of this, an express was sent off to Maj. Maxwell, to be on his
guard; and a detachment of 150 men was ordered to be in readiness to march
early the next morning, if it should be necessary to cover him.

13th. -- The intelligence of the enemy being out on both sides of the river,
was confirmed; as to the west side of the river, the enemy came out from
Paulus-Hook about 200 strong, with two fieldpieces, and had advanced within
about three miles of the Block-House, at Dobb's Ferry. About noon, a detachment
of 150 men, under the command of Maj. Graham, with one field-piece, embarked on
board a sloop, and with the gun-boat, having one six and one three pounder, and
and a flat boat, fell down the river to King's Ferry, where they were ordered
to debark, and make a movement to Tappan, for the relief of the Block-House.
The garrisons of the redoubts, on the east side, were doubled.

14th. -- About noon, Maj. Graham returned; he had, with the detachment,
embarked the preceding day, proceeded to King's Ferry, disembarked, marched to
Haverstraw, where he met the militia returning; when he returned to the Ferry,
re-embarked, and arrived at West-Point about noon; having exhibited a spirit
and expedition that did the detachment much honor.

The enemy were completely defeated in their design, by the militia, who early
turned out, attacked, repulsed, and pursued them, until they retook all their
plunder, except two horses, and justly merited high commendation. The militia
had one man wounded; the enemy were supposed to have had several killed and
wounded. The same day, Brig. Genesis Hand was announced, in general orders,
Adjutant-General of the army; in the room of Col. Scammel, who had discharged
the duty of that office for some time, to great acceptance. Col. Scammel
joined his regiment.

15th. -- Intelligence was received that the enemy's fleet, which sailed from
New York the preceding week, returned on Sunday, having found that the French
fleet were on the coast; their return occasioned some consternation at
New York. The same day, news reached the army, that Brig. Genesis Peleg Wadsworth,
who commanded some militia levies in the eastern parts of Massachusetts, had
been surprised and taken prisoner in the night, by two British officers and
some refugees, at a place called Cambden.

16th. -- It was learnt that the French fleet, with troops, sailed from
Rhode Island on the 8th; and it was said that Admiral Arbuthnot, with the
British fleet, came out of Gardner's Bay on the 10th. The smallpox at this
time made its appearance in the vicinity of the army, and several soldiers were
taken down with that distemper. The enemy who were out a day or two before, on
the east side of the Hudson, did no mischief. About this time, a discovery was
made, that a number of persons at Stratford, Norwalk, etc. had been secretly
associating, to submit to the enemy, if a favorable opportunity presented; and
to supply them with provisions, furnish intelligence, etc.

19th. -- Letters from Genesis Green, of the 28th ult. at Highrockford, on Haw
River, advised that Lord Cornwallis had retreated from Hillsborough, and that
Genesis Pickens and Col. Lee had fallen in with Col. Hamilton's corpse, (rising of
200) and had killed and taken almost every individual of them; and that several
other skirmishes had happened, but nothing decisive. Lord Cornwallis had
erected the Royal standard at Hillsborough, and issued a vain proclamation, as
usual.

By accounts from New York, it appeared that the British had declared war
against the Dutch, and had taken possession of St. Eustatia.

20th. -- In the afternoon, Genesis Washington arrived at headquarters, at
New-Windsor, from the eastward.

21st. -- Five prisoners of war were sent to West-Point, they were taken by
some of the light parties below the lines; a sixth who was taken was so badly
wounded, as to be left behind for the present.

22d. -- Several resolutions of the State of Massachusetts, in favor of the
line of the army, and for the discharge of governmental securities, were
received at West-Point.

23d. -- Intelligence was received, that the British fleet, which sailed from
New York some time before, and had been chased back by the French fleet, sailed
again on the preceding Wednesday, for the southward. It was said that Sir Henry
Clinton was on board, and that Genesis Knyphausen was to command in his absence --
that the enemy were collecting a number of flat boats in Spitten-Devil Creek,
near Kingsbridge, and that 24 were then collected -- that Arnold's corpse was
under orders to be in readiness to man the boats. Two spies were sent out of
New York, the same day that the fleet sailed; they were to pass, by different
routes, through the country to Canada.

24th. -- A number of prisoners of war, who had been collected at West-Point,
were sent off, under a guard of 60 men, commanded by Capt. Pope, to Lancaster,
in Pennsylvania.

28th. -- The New Hampshire brigade were ordered to do duty on the lines; and
the Rhode Island regiment to return to their quarters near Robinson's Mills.

29th. -- News was received from Philadelphia, that the French and English
fleets had had an engagement off the Capes of Virginia, but that the issue was
not known. The same day, intelligence was received from New York, that one of
Admiral Arbuthnot's ships had returned to New York, on Monday, and reported
that there had been an engagement between the two fleets, and that it was a
drawn battle.

31st. -- A New York paper of the 28th was received, in which it was said that
an engagement between the two fleets took place on the 16th, off the Capes of
Virginia, in which several ships on both sides received considerable damage;
and that the British had 1 Lieutenant, 2 midshipmen, and 40 seamen killed, and
80 wounded. The French account was not greatly different from that of the
British, but did not mention the number of killed or wounded.

A number of American soldiers who had not had the mall-pox, were collected and
inoculated.

Apri. 3d. -- Intelligence was received, that a battle had been fought between
Genesis Greene's army and that of Lord Cornwallis. The action was bloody; and
although his Lordship may be said to have gained the victory, as Genesis Green
retreated a mile from the field of battle, yet it was a dear bought victory.
Genesis Green having lost his horses, 4 pieces of cannon fell into the hands of
the enemy. Some of the British corpse, and in particular the guards, suffered
much. This day, Capt. Pray, of the water-guards, was reinforced with a
whale-boat, a Subaltern, and 14 men.

4th. -- Genesis Washington visited the Point. In the afternoon, 2 prisoners of
war were sent up -- they were of a party who had crossed Croten River, and
taken 16 head of cattle and 4 horses. On their return, near Dobb's Ferry, they
were overtaken by a party of the militia -- the cattle, etc. retaken, and two
of the party made prisoners. About this time, the southern mail was carried
off, between headquarters and the Jersies. The mail contained some letters of
importance. The troops which had sailed from New York, arrived safe in the
Chesapeak.

7th. -- Private intelligence was received, that four parties were to be sent
out -- one to take Genesis Washington, another the Governor of New Jersey, a third
the Governor of New York, the object of the fourth not known. The same day, the
gun-boat was ordered to take a station opposite Fort Montgomery; additional
guards to be mounted in the night time, and patroles to pass frequently.

8th. -- The enemy's flat boats, which had been collected near Kingsbridge,
were removed down into the East River.

9th. -- Intelligence was received from the commanding officer on the lines,
that the enemy were out toward White Plains, said to be about 90 horse and 50
foot.

10th. -- The great chain was hauled from off the beach near the red house at
West-Point, and towed down to the blocks, in order to its being laid across the
river -- about 280 men were ordered on this duty.

11th. -- The chain was properly fixed with great dexterity, and fortunately
without any accident.

12th. -- Our General visited the patients who were under inoculation with the
smallpox, when 500 were turned out and drawn up, all of whom were then under
the operation, and in a fine way. The same day, intelligence was received that
the enemy were preparing for another embarkation at New York, supposed for the
southward.

14th. -- A groom, belonging to Col. Gunning of the 82d British regiment, came
up; he deserted from his master with a very good faddle-horse, which he sold
for 100 dollars in specie. Intelligence was received that the enemy had brought
a large number of wagons across the Sound from Long Island, for the purpose of
making a grand forage; the covering party to consist of three or four hundred
men, of different corpse.

22d. -- Two hundred and forty thousand dollars in new emission bills were
brought to West-Point, from Boston, for the troops of the Massachusetts line.

24th. -- Monsieur Beville, Quartermaster of the French army at Newport,
arrived at headquarters, New-Windsor; he came on to view the roads, and
determine on the best route, should the French army move that way, and to fix
on proper places for magazines, etc.

26th. -- Genesis Washington visited West-Point, with Monsieur Beville, etc. The
next day, the latter set out on his return to Rhode Island, taking the lower
road through Connecticut. Many of the soldiers, who had gone through the
smallpox, joined their regiments the next day: of 500 who had been inoculated,
four only had then died. At this time, provisions were growing very scarce at
West-Point, and the prospects daily growing more alarming. The magazines in
Forts Clinton, Putnam, and some other of the most important works, had reserves
of the best provisions, which were not to be touched; that, in case the enemy,
by any sudden movement, should invest them, and cut off the communication with
the country, the garrisons might be enabled to hold out, until other troops, or
the militia of the country, could march to the relief of the besieged; but
unfortunately, the scarcity of provisions had become so great, that even these
reserves were broken in upon, and some of them nearly exhausted; when, after
some other representations, our General addressed the following letter to Genesis
Washington.

WEST-POINT, May 6, 1781. DEAR GENERAL,
I AM honored with yours of the 5th and 6th, to which I shall duly attend.

I hoped I should not have been compelled again to represent our situation on
account of provisions; but supplies of meat have not arrived -- all the Irish
beef in the store has been gone for some days -- we are at last forced in upon
the reserves; that in Fort Clinton has all been taken out this day -- the pork
which was ordered to be reserved is all issued, except about 16 barrels -- the
boats are now up from below for provisions, with representations that they are
out; the reserves will be gone in a few days if relief does not arrive, and
hunger must inevitably disperse the troops. If the authority of our country
will not order on supplies, I will struggle to the last moment to maintain the
post: but regard to my own character compels me to be thus explicit -- that if
any ill consequences happen to this post, or its dependencies, through want of
provisions, I shall not hold myself accountable for them.

I have the honor to be, etc. (Signed) W. HEATH.

His Excellency Genesis WASHINGTON.

To which the Commander in Chief wrote, the following answer:

HEADQUARTERS, NEW-WINDSOR, May 8th, 1781. DEAR SIR,
DISTRESSED beyond expression at the present situation and future prospects of
the army, with regard to provisions, and convinced with you, that, unless an
immediate and regular supply can be obtained, the most dangerous consequences
are to be apprehended -- I have determined to make one great effort more on the
subject, and must request that you will second and enforce my representations
to, and requisitions upon the New England States, by your personal application
to the several Executives, and even Assemblies, if sitting, as I suppose they
will be in the course of this month.

From your intimate knowledge of our embarrassed and distressed circumstances,
and great personal influence with the eastern States, I am induced to commit
the execution of this interesting and important business to you, and wish you
to set out on this mission as early as may be convenient.

(Signed) GEO. WASHINGTON.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

On the next day, our General received the following letter of instructions,
from the Commander in Chief, viz.

HEADQUARTERS, NEW-WINDSOR, May 9th, 1781. DEAR SIR,
YOU will be pleased to proceed immediately to the several eastern States, with
the dispatches addressed to the Governors of Connecticut, Rhode Island,
Massachusetts Bay, and the President of New Hampshire, on the subject of
supplies for the army. The present critical and alarming situation of our
troops and garrisons, for the want of provisions, is (from the nature of your
command) so perfectly known to you, and your personal influence with the
New England States is so considerable, that I could not hesitate to commit to
you a negotiation, on the success of which, the very existence of the army
depends.

The great objects of your attention and mission, are, 1st -- An immediate
supply of beef cattle. 2d -- The transportation of all the salted provisions in
the western parts of Connecticut and Massachusetts; and 3d -- The establishment
of a regular, systematic, effectual plan, for feeding the army through the
campaign. Unless the two former are effected, the garrison of Fort Schuyler
must inevitably, that of West-Point may probably, fall, and the whole army be
disbanded: without the latter, the same perplexing wants, irregularities and
distress, which we have so often experienced, will incessantly occur, with
eventual far greater evils, if not final ruin.

With regard to the particular mode of obtaining and transporting supplies, I
will not presume to dictate; but something must now be attempted on the spur of
the occasion. I would suggest whether it would not be expedient for a Committee
from the several States, (consisting of a few active, sensible men) to meet at
some convenient place, in order to make out, upon a uniform and great scale,
all the arrangements respecting supplies and transportation for the campaign.
In the mean time, to avoid the impending dissolution of the army, the States
must individually comply precisely with the requisitions of the Quartermaster
and Commissary upon them.

As the salted provisions which have been put up for the public, in the eastern
States, (except in the western parts of Connecticut and Massachusetts) cannot
at present be transported to the army, you will obtain accurate official
returns of the quantity that has been procured in the respective States, at
what places, and in whose charge it actually is; and if it should not all be
collected and lodged in the deposits that have been pointed out, you will urge
this immediately to be done; and that the provisions should be repacked,
stored, and taken care of in such a manner, as to prevent the hazard of its
being tainted or lost by the approaching hot season.

I omit entering into the detail of particulars, which it may be necessary to
state to the respective Executives, (or Legislatures, if in sitting) to enforce
the present requisition, because you are as well acquainted with the
circumstances of our distress, the prospects before us, and the only resources
from whence we can derive relief, as it is possible for you to be. Previous to
your departure, you will obtain from the Quarter-Master-General and Commissary
with the army, the proper estimates of supplies and transportation to be
required of the several States, together with all the light and information
concerning their department, which may be requisite to transact the business
committed to you.

After having delivered the dispatches with which you are charged, and made
such further representations as you may judge necessary, you will not cease
your applications and importunities, until you are informed officially, whether
effectual measuares are or will be taken, to prevent the army from starving and
disbanding. What supplies in general, and particularly of beef cattle, may
certainly be depended upon, to be delivered at fixed regular periods (monthly
or weekly) at the army, during the whole campaign. When you shall have seen
this business put upon the surest footing and in the best train of execution,
(which you will endeavor to have effected as early as possible) you will be
pleased to report to me, without delay, the success of your proceedings.

I heartily wish you success and a pleasant journey, and am, etc.

(Signed) G. WASHINGTON.
P.S. I wish attention may be paid, to learn what quantity of rum is in store,
at what places, and in what manner it may be forwarded. In transportation, the
arrangements should be made with the States, so as to have the articles brought
entirely through to the army, without having them stopped on the road. You will
also be pleased to urge the forwarding the summer clothing.

G. W.



Maj. Genesis HEATH.

During the month of April, a large number of recruits from the eastern States,
to fill up their respective battalions, arrived at West-Point.

9th. -- The Commander in Chief visited West-Point.

11th. -- In the morning, our General left West-Point, and proceeded up the
river to New-Windsor, where he received from the Commander in Chief the
dispatches addressed to the several Executives of the New England States; and
in the afternoon crossed the Hudson, on his journey eastward. On his reaching
Fishkill, he found that Governor Clinton, of New York, was making every
exertion in his power for the relief of the army -- that he had issued impress
warrants, to take flour and other provisions where they could be found, etc.

14th. -- He arrived at Hartford, where he found the Legislature in session.
The dispatches to Governor Trumbull were immediately presented to him, with an
earnest request for speedy relief. This venerable patriot gave assurance of his
immediate attention and exertions, and accordingly laid the dispatches from
Genesis Washington before the Legislature, who also discovered the same noble
patriotism. They inquired into the state of their treasury, and finding it was
destitute of money, except a sum appropriated to another purpose, they ordered
this money to be taken, and directed Col. Champion, one of their number, (a
gentleman remarkable for his knowledge in the state of provisions in all the
towns, skill in purchasing, and expedition in forwarding) immediately to
purchase and forward on to the army 160 head of beef cattle, and 1,000 barrels
of salted provisions from their stores; and resolved to make every other
exertion in their power, to comply with the requisitions of the Commander in
Chief, as they respected both fresh and salted provisions, by appointing a
Committee for a general arrangement of supplies.

16th. -- Our General left Hartford, and on the 18th reached Greenwich, in the
State of Rhode Island, where he waited upon Gov. Green, and presented the
dispatches from Genesis Washington. The Legislature of the State were not then in
session; but Gov. Green made the most satisfactory assurances, that the State
of Rhode Island would adopt every measure recommended by the Commander in
Chief. Our General left Greenwich the same day, and arrived at his house in
Roxbury on the evening of the 19th, and the next day waited upon Gov. Hancock
at Boston, and presented the dispatches with which he was charged. The new
Legislature of Massachusetts were to convene on the last Wednesday of the
month. Gov. Hancock gave the fullest assurances, that in the interim the
Executive would do every thing in its power for the immediate relief of the
army, by directing the several contractors of provisions in the State to
forward all in their power with the utmost expedition.

21st. -- Intelligence was received at Boston, that the State ship-of-war, the
Protector, of 28 guns, commanded by Capt. Williams, had been taken and carried
into New York.

The next day, intelligence was received, that on the 13th, Col. Green, of the
Rhode Island regiment, who was doing duty on the lines of the American army,
was surprised by a body of the enemy's horse, supposed to be about 150
dragoons, and that the Colonel, Maj. Flagg, two Subalterns, and 27 men were
killed, and several wounded. Col. Green was a brave and intrepid officer, and
his loss was much regretted. The Colonel had taken post above and near to
Croten River, at a place where the river was fordable, to prevent the enemy
passing up by this ford to ravage the country. He had practiced the greatest
vigilance in guarding this ford in the night time, taking off the guards after
sunrise, apprehending that the enemy would never presume to cross the river in
the day time; but the enemy, having learnt his mode of doing duty, on the
morning of the 13th effected his overthrow, by crossing the ford soon after the
guards had come off, and surrounding their quarters before they had an idea of
any enemy being near them. In this situation, the utmost exertion could not
then avail them.

23d. -- Our General left Roxbury on his way to New Hampshire, arrived at
Exeter on the evening of the 24th, and delivered to the Honorable Mr. Wear the
dispatches addressed to him. The Legislature of New Hampshire was not then in
session. The next day, he had an interview with the Honorable President and the
Council of Safety, when such representations, (in addition to the requisitions
of the Commander in Chief) were made to them, as the exigencies of the case
required; and the fullest assurances were received, that every aid in the power
of the State should be afforded.

26th. -- Our General left Exeter on his return, and on the 27th arrived at his
house in Roxbury. On the 29th, he again waited on Gov. Hancock, and requested
that the requisitions of the Commander in Chief of the army might be
predominant in all the public objects.

The 30th was the General Election day in Massachusetts: and it appeared that
his Excellency John Hancock was re-elected Governor, who, as soon as the two
Houses were organized, laid the requisitions of Genesis Washington before them.

June 2d. -- Our General was heard before a Committee of both Houses on the
subject of his mission. The zeal and patriotism of the several Executives and
Legislatures of the New England States, to relieve and ^^ply supply the army
with provisions, were so conspicuous on this occasion, that it is not possible
to say which, or whether any one of them exceeded the other; each was for
making every exertion in its power; and, to ensure success to their
resolutions, they all fell in with the recommendation of the Commander in
Chief, and appointed Committees to meet in Convention, to digest and systemize
the business. The Committees met accordingly at Providence, in Rhode Island,
and were so fortunate in their arrangements, that the most ample supplies of
meat were afterward furnished for the main army, and a surplus of 100 head of
beef cattle weekly sent on after Genesis Washington toward Virginia, until he
ordered a discontinuance of that supply, as will appear in the sequel. While
the New England States were thus intent in supplying meat for the army, the
State of New York was equally assiduous in furnishing flour and forage.

4th. -- Intelligence was received by a vessel from the West Indies, that the
Count de Grass, with a French fleet of upwards of 20 sail of the line, had
arrived in that quarter. The same day, there was a confirmation of this news,
and that the fleet, with troops on board, was seen coming this way.

The same day, intelligence was received, that there had been an action at the
southward, between Genesis Green and the British army in that quarter. Genesis
Green, having reconnoitred Cambden, did not think it expedient to storm the
enemy's works, but retired a little back, with a view to draw the enemy out; in
this he succeeded, and an action commenced. The Maryland troops being attacked
under some disadvantage, an attempt was made to change their position; this was
unfortunately taken by Genesis Greene's army for a retreat, and the whole army
retreated accordingly. Genesis Green had 17 men killed; his retreat was about 2
or 3 miles, and the troops were in high spirits. It is always a dangerous
maneuver to change a position in the face of an enemy; but necessity sometimes
requires it.

Genesis Phillips, of the British army, had died in Virginia, of a fever.

6th. -- The Continental frigate, Alliance, arrived in Boston harbor from
France. The Alliance had taken 6 prizes; 2 West-Indiamen, 2 sloops of war, and
2 privateers. In the engagement with the sloops of war, both of which engaged
the Alliance in a calm, Capt. Barry was wounded in the shoulder by a
grape-shot; the Captain of Marines, and 8 or 9 men killed, and about 20 wounded.

9th. -- Orders came on from Genesis Washington, to forward with all possible
dispatch all the cannon, mortars, powder, shot, shells, and other military
stores belonging to the United States, which were then in Massachusetts and
Rhode Island, and also requesting the loan of some heavy artillery, powder,
etc. of the State. The most spirited measures were taken for completing the
Continental battalions, and raising a body of militia to be in readiness to
march when called for.

The General Assembly of Massachusetts, in their session at this time, passed
resolutions for settling with the troops of their line to the last of the year
1780, making good the depreciation of their pay, etc.

21st. -- Intelligence was received, that the British had formed a junction of
their principal force at the southward in Virginia, by which means Genesis Green
would deprive them of all their posts in South Carolina; that on the 10th of
May, Lord Rawdon was compelled to evacuate Cambden with precipitation, leaving
behind him 3 of his officers and 58 privates, who had been dangerously wounded,
and were unable to be removed. He burnt part of the town, and some of his
baggage. On the 11th of the same month, the strong post of Orangeburgh
surrendered to Genesis Sumpter; a Colonel, several officers, and upwards of 80 men
were made prisoners. On the 12th, the garrison of Fort Mott, consisting of 7
officers, 12 non-commissioned officers, and 165 privates, surrendered by
capitulation to Genesis Marrion. On the 15th, Fort Granby capitulated to Lieut.
Col. Lee; 1 Lieut. Colonel, 2 Majors, 6 Captains, 6 Lieutenants, 3 Ensigns, 1
Surgeon, 2 Serjeant-Majors, 17 Sergeants, 9 Corporals, and 305 privates
surrendered; large quantities of provisions, and some military stores were
taken at some of the posts. At the same time, the posts of Augusta and
Ninety-Six were invested by Genesis Pickens, and Genesis Green on the 16th had
determined to march the army to expedite their reduction.

23d. -- Intelligence was received, that some time before, the barracks in Fort
Schuyler had taken fire, and were burnt down; and that afterward the fort was
dismantled and evacuated. The same day it was reported, that the Spaniards had
taken Pensacola from the British. The marine mortars, and a number of heavy
iron cannon, 18 and 24 pounders, were removing from Boston to the North River,
New York. The British forces in Virginia, after their junction, were said to be
about 6,000. The invalids, who had been doing duty in Boston, received orders
to march to West-Point, where the whole corpse was to be collected, and compose
a part of the garrison of that post.

28th. -- His Excellency the Commander in Chief was pleased to communicate to
our General, that in the arrangement of the main army, the command of the right
wing had been assigned to him.

29th. -- A vessel arrived at Boston from Cadiz, with a quantity of clothing
for the United States. This vessel brought an account, that the British had
again succored the garrison of Gibraltar, but that the Spaniards continued the
siege.

30th. -- His most Christian Majesty's frigate, the Servilante, arrived in
Boston harbor from the West Indies; on her passage had a warm engagement with
a British ship-of-war, when some damage was sustained on both sides. This
frigate brought news, that the French had taken the island of Tobago, and had
blocked up Admiral Rodney's fleet at Barbados.

July 4th was celebrated at Boston, being the Anniversary of the Declaration of
American Independence.

6th. -- Information was received, that Genesis Washington had ordered the
American troops from their several cantonments, and that the whole had
assembled, and were encamped near Peek's Kill.

Some of the enemy's cruizers from Penobscot were cruizing in the Bay, where
they took several vessels; one within a league of the light-house.

11th. -- Intelligence was received, that there had been a skirmish between the
Americans and British, between White Plains and King's Bridge, but no
particulars were received.

12th. -- Our General set out from his house in Roxbury for the army.

19th. -- The enemy's shipping, which were up the North River, ran down; there
was a brisk cannonade at Dobb's Ferry.

21st. -- The American field artillery, which had for some days been on board
vessels in the North River, proceeded downwards to the nearest landing to the
army.

When the enemy's shipping passed Dobb's Ferry, on the 19th, a box of powder on
board the Savage ship-of-war took fire, supposed by the bursting of a howitzer
shell, on which a number of the crew, apprehending that the ship would blow up,
jumped overboard into the river. An American, who was a prisoner on board,
jumped overboard at the same time, and swam on shore, relating what had
happened; he also reported, that the Savage was several times hulled by our
shot, and must have suffered considerable loss. The late skirmish near King's
Bridge was occasioned by the American army's moving down, in order to give the
French officers a view of the British out-posts near the bridge. A number of
Americans were killed and wounded by long shot from the yaugers of the enemy,
who kept up a popping fire whenever they could reach our troops.

27th. -- Our General arrived at the army, which was encamped at Phillipsburgh,
in two lines; the park of artillery in the center of the second line. Accounts
had been received from the southward, that the enemy had no footing in Georgia,
except Savannah, nor in South Carolina, except Charleston. The position which
the American army now occupied was between the lines the preceding campaigns;
consequently the roads and commons, as well as the fields and pastures, were
covered with grass; while the many deserted houses and ruined fences depicted
the horrid devastations of war. The French army, under Genesis Rochambeau, was
encamped at a small distance, on the left of the Americans, in one line.

29th. -- A forage was made toward Phillips's, conducted by Col. Scammel. It
was said that some of the British troops had returned from the southward to
New York; and that those in Virginia were collected at Portsmouth.

August. -- On the night of the 3d, about 11 o'clock, the British and American
guard-boats met in the river, near Dobb's Ferry, when a considerable firing
ensued; we had one man badly wounded, who died soon after. The damage sustained
by the enemy was not known.

6th. -- The Commander in Chief, attended by a number of the General Officers,
reconnoitred toward King's Bridge, covered by strong detachments of cavalry
and infantry. Three ships and a galley lay in the river between Fort Washington
and Spitten-Devil Creek. The enemy did not make any movements. The morning of
the 7th, about 2 o'clock, the army was awakened by the firing of cannon at
Dobb's Ferry; it appeared that 2 of the enemy's gun-boats had come up as high
as the ferry, probably to endeavor to seize some vessels or boats; on finding
that they were discovered, they fired four cannon, but to no effect. Four
cannon were discharged at the boats from the battery, on which they went down
the river. Two days before, Delancy's corpse ventured as far above King's
Bridge, as Phillips's.

News was received, that the great French Financier, Neckar, had resigned, and
that Monsieur Fleury had been appointed in his room.

Capt. Saltonstall, formerly of the frigate Warren, who was dismissed the
service on account of his conduct in the Penobscot expedition, about this time
behaved most gallantly in a privateer, on a cruize against the enemy.

The American army at this time continued in the same position at
Phillipsburgh. The Connecticut and Rhode Island lines, and 6 regiments of the
Massachusetts line, composed the front line; the New Hampshire line, four
regiments of Massachusetts, Crane's and Lamb's regiments of artillery, with the
sappers and miners, the second line; the right wing commanded by Maj. Genesis
Heath, the left wing by Maj. Genesis Lord Sterling; the advance of the American
army on a height a little advanced of Dobb's Ferry, under the command of Col.
Scammel, and Sheldon's dragoons near Dobb's Ferry. The French army in one line
on the left of the Americans, with their legion under the Duke de Lauzun, at
White Plains. Genesis Waterbury, with the militia under his command, toward
New-Rochelle. The camps at this time swarmed with flies, which were very
troublesome.

11th. -- Robert Morris, Esquire the American Financier, and Richard Peter's, Esquire
one of the Members of the Board of War, visited the army. The same day, the
advance of the army took a position a little more to the northward, and the
dragoons were added to Col. Scammel's command. A fleet arrived at New York from
England; they brought over between 2 and 3,000 Hessian recruits.

14th. -- Col. Hazen's and Col. Vanscaak's regiments joined the army. A French
frigate arrived about this time at Rhode Island, supposed to have brought news
of the approach of the Count de Grass. A few nights before, Genesis Schuyler came
very near being taken and carried off from his house in Albany.

In the general orders of the 15th, the army was directed to hold itself in the
most perfect readiness to march on the shortest notice.

16th. -- It was whispered, that the Count de Grass, with 28 sail of the line,
besides frigates, with a number of land forces on board, might soon be expected
on our coast, and these, with the squadron under the command of the Chevalier
de Barras, would make a fleet of 36 sail of the line, a force probably superior
to any the British could assemble in these seas.

Under prospects so flattering, the Commander in Chief determined to strike the
enemy a capital blow in some quarter. To strike at their very root in New York,
was a most disirable object; but the situation of New York with Long Island,
and Staten-Island, and the adjacent country, was such, as would require a very
large army to effect a complete investiture, and give a proper security against
the sallies of the enemy, which, from situation, might be easily and frequently
made -- that such an army must be composed, in a very considerable degree, of
militia, to whom the continuing long in camp had often been found disagreeable;
and the French were not without apprehensions that if their fleet entered the
harbor of New York, and became warmly engaged with the British ships and
batteries, in the course of those maneuvers which it might be necessary to
make, some of their heavy ships, through the want of a competent knowledge of
all parts of the bay, might get aground, or be damaged; while all these
inconveniences would be avoided, in case Lord Cornwallis, with the British army
in Virginia, were made the object, and his capture would be almost certain,
while the American main army might be left in sufficient strength, to act on
the defensive against Sir Henry Clinton, and effectually cover the important
posts in the Highlands of New York.

17th. -- General Washington was pleased to communicate to our General, (in
confidence) his intentions, at the same time intimating to him, that he should
give him the command of the main army during his absence. The whole of the
French army, with the two regiments of New Jersey, first regiment of New York,
Col. Hazen's regiment, Col. Olney's regiment of Rhode Island, Col. Lamb's
regiment of artillery, and the light troops under the command of Col. Scammel,
were detached for the expedition against Lord Cornwallis, and the army under
his command, at York-Town, in Virginia.

18th. -- Some of the corpse began to move toward the serries. The next day,
the Commander in Chief was pleased to honor our General with the following.

To (...) General HEATH.
SIR,
YOU are to take command of all the troops remaining in this department,
consisting of the two regiments of New Hampshire, ten of Massachusetts, and
five of Connecticut infantry, the corpse of invalids, Sheldon's legion, the 3d
regiment of artillery, together with all such State troops and militia as are
retained in service of those which would have been under my own command.

The security of West-Point, and the posts in the Highlands, is to be
considered as the first object of your attention; in order to effect this, you
will make such dispositions, as in your judgment the circumstances shall from
time to time require, taking care to have as large a supply of salted
provisions as posfible, constantly on hand; to have the fortifications, works,
and magazines repaired and perfected as far as may be; to have the garrison at
least, in all cases, kept up to its present strength; to have the minutes,
plans, and arrangements, for the defense and support of this important post,
perfectly understood and vigorously executed in case of any attempt against it.
Ample magazines of wood and forage are to be laid in, against the approaching
winter; the former should be cut on the margin of the river, and transported to
the garrison by water; the latter ought to be collected from the country below
the lines, in the greatest quantities possible, and deposited in such places as
you shall judge proper.

The force now put under your orders, it is presumed, will be sufficient for
all the purposes above mentioned, as well as to yield a very considerable
protection and cover to the country, without hazarding the safety of the posts
in the Highlands; this is to be esteemed, as it respects the friendly
inhabitants and resources of the country, and extremely interesting object; but
when compared with the former, of a secondary nature. The protection of the
northern and western frontier of the State of New York, as well as those parts
of that and other States most contiguous and exposed to the ravages and
depredations of the enemy, will claim your attention; but as the contingencies
which are to be expected in the course of this campaign, may be so various,
unforeseen, and almost infinite, that no particular line of conduct can be
prescribed for them -- upon all such occasions, you will be governed by your
own prudence and discretion, on which the fullest confidence is placed.

Although your general rule of conduct will be to act on the defensive only,
yet it is not meant to prohibit you from striking a blow at the enemy's posts
or detachments, should a fair opportunity present itself. The most eligible
position for your army, in my opinion, will be above (that is, on the north
side) of the Croten, as well for the purpose of supporting the garrison of West
Point, annoying the enemy, and covering the country, as for the security and
repose of your own troops.

Waterbury's brigade (which may be posted toward the Sound) Sheldon's corpse,
the State troops of New York, and other light parties may occasionally be made
use of to hold the enemy in check, and carry on the petit-guerre with them; but
I would recommend keeping your force as much collected and compact as the
nature of the service will admit, doing duty by corpse instead of detachments,
whenever it is practicable; and above all, exerting yourself most strenuously
and assiduously, while the troops are in a camp of repose, to make them perfect
in their exercise and maneuvers, and to establish the most perfect system of
discipline and duty. The good of the service and emulation of corpse, will, I am
persuaded, prompt the officers and men to devote their whole time and attention
to the pleasing and honorable task of becoming masters of their profession.
The uncertainty which the present movement of the army will probably occasion
with the enemy, ought to be increased by every means in your power, and the
deception kept up as long as possible. It will not be expedient to prevent the
militia, which were ordered, from coming in, until the arrival of the Count de
Grass, or something definite and certain is known from the southward; and even
these circumstances may, (but of this you will be advised) render it advisable
to keep the enemy at New York in check -- prevent their detaching to reinforce
their southern army, or to harass the inhabitants on the seacoasts.

The redoubt on the east side of Dobb's Ferry is to be dismantled and
demolished; the platforms to be taken up, and transported up the river, if it
can be conveniently done. The block-house on the other side to be maintained,
or evacuated and destroyed, as you shall judge proper. The water-guards, and
other precautions to prevent surprise, you will be pleased to take into your
consideration, and regulate in such a manner as you shall judge most expedient.
You will be pleased to keep me regularly advised of every important event which
shall take place in your departments.

Given under my hand, at headquarters, near Dobb's Ferry, this 19th day of
August, 1781. (Signed) GEO. WASHINGTON.
P. S. By the act of Congress of the 3d of Oct. 1780, a return is to be made to
them annually, on, or before the first of September, of the troops belonging to
the several States, that requisitions may be made for completing the same. This
you will please to have done by the troops under your command.

The preservation of the boats is a matter of very great importance, to which
you will attend. Let all the new boats, and such others as are not absolutely
necessary, and allotted to the service of the garrison, be hauled up, and put
under the care of a guard, so that the person to whom they are committed, shall
be accountable for every boat.

The abuses committed by people belonging to commissioned whale-boats, on
Long Island, ought to be inquired into and suppressed, especially as Congress
have ordered those commissions to be revoked.

G. W.




19th. -- About noon, his Excellency Genesis Washington left the army, setting his
face toward his native State, in full confidence, to use his own words, "with
a common blessing," of capturing Lord Cornwallis and his army; while our
General was left to watch Sir Henry Clinton, and guard against those attempts
which it was probable he would make to succor Cornwallis, direct, or by making
such other movements as might tend to induce Genesis Washington to give up his
object, or to avail himself of some important posts in his absence. Sir Henry
Clinton was consequently on the rack, to devise something which should effect
this purpose; a stroke at the posts in the Highlands, Connecticut, New Jersey,
Albany and Philadelphia, was contemplated. Against all this had our General to
guard. -- Let impartiality judge, and candor decide on his conduct.

On the morning of the same day, the French army marched from their encampment
toward King's Ferry, where they were to cross the river. The American park of
artillery, Col. Olney's regiment, and the New York regiment, decamped and moved
the same way.

20th. -- A little after noon, our General ordered off the baggage to the
strong grounds near Young's, which at about 6 o'clock was followed by the army,
marching by the left in one column, which took a strong position during the
night. The pickets after dusk were drawn back a little to the northward of the
former encampment. The advanced parties under Maj. Scott were ordered to join
their respective regiments, and Sheldon's horse to patrole in the front.

21st. -- Col. Putnam, with 320 infantry, Col. Sheldon's horse, and two
companies of the New York levies, were ordered to form an advance for the army,
and remain at or near their present ground. About 12 o'clock at noon, the army
took up its line of march, and halted at night on the lower parts of
North-Castle. Two regiments had been detached on the march to Sing-Sing church,
to cover a quantity of baggage belonging to the French army, assist in removing
it, etc. and a detachment was sent to the New Bridge, to secure a quantity of
flour lodged near that place.

22d. -- The army marched from North-Castle, and encamped at Crom-Pond; all the
French stores at Tarrytown and Sing-Sing had been secured.

23d. -- The army marched from Crom-Pond, and took a strong position at Peek's
Kill; the first line encamping before the village, and the second behind it.
After the troops were encamped, 80 wagons were sent off to assist in
forwarding the stores of the army with Genesis Washington. Intelligence was
received that a frigate and store-ship had arrived at Boston, from France, with
military stores, etc. for the United States.

24th. -- The French troops had not all passed the Ferry -- 150 Americans were
sent to aid them, and at evening 150 more. Intelligence was received that a
large French fleet had been seen standing for the continent.

26th. -- The whole of the French army had crossed the river. Genesis Washington
was as far as Ramapaugh in the forenoon. Six deserters came in from the enemy,
and three prisoners of war belonging to Delancy's corpse, were sent up; they had
taken and were driving off about 30 sheep, which were recovered.

27th. -- Dispatches were sent off to Gov. Trumbull at Hartford, and Gov.
Hancock at Boston. A heavy cannonade was heard-towards New York, from early in
the morning till two in the afternoon, supposed to be off at sea.

30th. -- At evening a detachment consisting of 250 men, marched toward the
New Bridge, where wagons were collecting for a grand forage, which was to be
covered by this detachment and the troops on the lines -- the whole under the
command of Col. Greaton. By the last accounts, Genesis Washington was as far as
Chatham, in the Jersies.

31st. -- Colonel Laurens passed the army, on his way from Boston to
Philadelphia: he had brought from France a large sum in specie, for the United
States. Col. Laurens reported the friendly disposition of the European powers
toward the United States; that Great Britain continued to stand without a
single ally, nor could she obtain one in the war in which she was engaged.

September 1st. -- The foragers returned with 42 loads of hay. A Hessian
rifleman came in with his rifle.

The same day, letters were received from Genesis Washington, dated at Trenton,
the 29th ult. mentioning that a British fleet of 15 sail of the line had
arrived at Sandy-Hook from the West Indies. The same evening, about 40 Indians,
from the Oneida and other neighboring tribes, came to the army, on their way
after Generals Washington and Rochambeau.

2d. -- Intelligence was received from New York, that a fleet, under the
command of Admiral Sir Samuel Hood, had arrived at Sandy-Hook from the
West Indies, consisting of 14 sail of the line, three 44 gun ships, one of 28,
a sloop and fire-ship. The ships of the line were, Barfleur, of 90 guns,
Princessa, Invincible, Alcide, Alfred, Ajax, Resolution, Centaur, Intrepid,
Terrible, Montague, Shrewsbury, Belliqueax, and --, 74 guns each. It was said
that the 1st battalion of Royal, 13th and 69th British regiments came in the
fleet.

3d. -- Intelligence was received, that Genesis Washington was at Philadelphia the
preceding Friday, and that his army was to march from Trenton, as yesterday.

4th. -- Intelligence was received from New York, that the British fleet had
sailed to counteract the French. The day before, the southern post-rider, with
the mail, was stopped near Pompton in the Jersies, and the mail carried off;
the horse was left in the road. The same day, a fleet of 26 sail, some of which
were large, passed Stamford to the eastward.

6th. -- Intelligence was received from New York, that an embargo was laid on
the shipping there, and that 6 British transports had been taken by the French.
The enemy's shipping in the North River above Fort Washington, had all gone
down.

7th. -- Intelligence was received from New York, that the Count de Grass had
arrived in the Chesapeak on the 31st ultimo; that a 64 gun ship and a frigate
had entered York River; that Lord Cornwallis was preparing for a vigorous
defense; and that 6 sail of victuallers had been taken by Admiral Barras. A
heavy cannonade was heard the day before, toward the Hook. The same day, there
was much passing between the city and Fort Washington, which occasioned a great
rising of dust, visible at a great distance; and there was a rumbling of
carriages in the night. Mr. Rivington, in his paper, observed the present to be
the most interesting and critical era of the war. The same evening, a
detachment marched from our army for a grand forage.

8th. -- Two companies of Col. Weissenfel's regiment were ordered to Albany, to
cover that city against the designs of the enemy. The same evening, our General
received a letter from Genesis Washington, dated at the Head of Elk the preceding
day, in which he observes, "I have it now in my power to congratulate you on
the arrival of Count de Grass, with 28 ships of the line and some frigates, in
the Chesapeak, with a body of land forces on board, which he debarked
immediately on his arrival. On his passage, he took Lord Rawdon, who was bound
from Charleston to England. This arrival, with Col. Laurens, from France, must
fill the United States with the most happy prospects and expectations." -- "I
am thus far on my way to Virginia, with the troops under my command; we are now
embarking the heavy baggage, stores, and some of the troops." -- "I must beg of
you not to forget sending the quantity of beef I requested, as I must at
present altogether depend on that supply."

The same day, intelligence was received, that the enemy's fleet, which sailed
up the Sound on the 4th, had made a descent on New London. At evening, Maj.
Talmadge, with 20 cavalry and 200 infantry, was ordered to move immediately
toward the Sound. The preceding day, about 30 sail of the enemy's vessels
passed the Sound toward New York.

On the morning of the 9th the foragers returned, with 28 loads of hay.

10th. -- Intelligence was received from Governor Trumbull, that the enemy had
made a descent on New London, on the evening of the 6th, with about 2,000
infantry and 300 light horse. Their fleet consisted of about 40 sail of
ships-of-war and transports; they plundered the inhabitants of property to a
large amount, and burnt a great part of the town. The militia behaved very
gallantly, and a number of very valuable citizens were killed; among others,
Col. Ledyard, Captains Saltonstall and Richards. The enemy, in three assaults
on the fort on Groton side of the river, were repulsed, but on the fourth
attempt carried it. The militia collecting in greater numbers, with some pieces
of artillery, the enemy retreated on board their shipping. Part of the American
shipping in the harbor were scuttled, and some were run up the river. In
Governor Trumbull's letter, the enemy were charged with behaving in a wanton
and barbarous manner; and that of between 70 and 80 men who were killed, 3 only
were killed before the enemy entered the Fort, and the garrison had submitted;
that on Col. Ledyard's delivering his sword reversed, to the commanding
officer, who entered the fort, the officer immediately plunged it in the
Colonel's body, on which several soldiers bayoneted him. It is also asserted,
that upon the foregoing taking place, an American officer, who stood near to
Col. Ledyard, instantly stabbed the British officer who stabbed the Colonel; on
which, the British indiscriminately bayoneted a great number of Americans.

This expedition was commanded by Arnold. The British loss was very
considerable in killed and wounded; among the former was Major Montgomery.
Arnold himself continued on the New London side, and while his troops were
plundering and burning, was said to have been at a house where he was treated
very politely; that while he was sitting with the gentleman regaling himself,
the latter observed, that he hoped his house and property would be safe; he was
answered, that while he (Arnold) was there, it would not be touched; but the
house, except the room in which they were, was soon plundered, and found to be
on fire. During the plunder of the town, the British (as is always the case in
a plunder) were in great confusion, setting their arms against trees and
fences, while they were collecting and carrying off their plunder; in this
situation they might have been easily defeated; nor would it have been the
first time that an army in possession of victory, lost it in this way; hence by
the articles of war, "If any officer or soldier shall leave his post or
colors, to go in search of plunder, he is liable to suffer death for the
offense."

It is not meant to exculpate or to aggravate the conduct of the enemy on this
occasion -- but two things are to be remembered; first, that in almost all
cases the slaughter does but begin when the vanquished give way; and it has
been said, that if this was fully considered, troops would never turn their
backs, if it were possible to face their enemy: Secondly, in all attacks by
assault, the assailants, between the feelings of danger on the one hand, and
resolution to overcome it on the other, have their minds worked up almost to a
point of fury and madness, which those who are assailed, from a confidence in
their works, do not feel; and that consequently when a place is carried, and
the assailed submit, the assailants cannot instantaneously curb their fury to
reason, and in this interval, many are slain in a way which a cool bystander
would call wanton and barbarous, and even the perpetrators themselves, when
their rage subsided, would condemn; but while the human passions remain as they
now are, there is scarcely a remedy.

11th. -- Arnold's fleet was still in the Sound, and further depredations were
expected; they were this morning at Killingsworth, and about noon 50 sail of
vessels came to anchor between Norwalk and Stamford. Major Talmadge, who was
returning, upon supposition that the enemy had returned to New York, was
ordered back immediately. Maj. Knapp was detached with 100 men to reinforce
Col. Putnam on the lines; and Brig. Genesis Huntington, with the first Connecticut
brigade, and a detachment of artillery was ordered to march toward the Sound.
The same day, the army moved from its encampment at Peek's-Kill, and took a
very strong position on Bald Hill, where it encamped in one line, the second
line forming in the center of the first; and the 8th Massachusetts regiment was
ordered to march from the army, and reinforce the garrison of West-Point.

13th. -- Intelligence was received, that on the enemy's anchoring off
Stamford, Maj. Talmadge advanced toward the town; Genesis Huntington had advanced
as far as Bedford; and that the preceding morning the enemy's fleet came to
sail, and stood principally to the westward; some of the fleet, at the same
time, standing over to Huntington Bay, Long Island, Maj. Talmadge was to remain
at or near Canaan, for the protection of the inhabitants; Genesis Huntington to
return to the army.

The Hessian recruits, which had a little before arrived at New York, were very
sickly, and many died. The fleet which had arrived at New York were in bad
condition. The Prudente and Robuste, lay at the ship-yard; the Roebuck had been
sent to Halifax to repair, and had not returned. Mr. Rivington, in his paper,
talked of another fleet coming out, under Admiral Digby.

15th. -- The enemy had still a number of troops on board their transports in
the harbor. The same day, intelligence was received from Canada, that the
enemy were preparing a number of canoes and small batteaux at St. John's,
baking hard bread at Montreal, and forwarding it to St. John's, etc. The Cork
fleet had arrived at Quebec. The same day, about 40 sail of the enemy's vessels
passed in the Sound to the eastward.

17th. -- Intelligence was received, that a brigade of troops had lately come
to St. John's, from whence an incursion on our northern frontier might be
expected; on which the whole of Wiessensel's regiment was ordered for Albany
immediately; notice was also given to the eastern Governors, and the Brigadiers
commanding the militia in the counties of Hampshire and Berkshire, in
Massachusetts, requested to lend their aid, if it should be found necessary.

18th. -- A deserter came in from New York; he reported, that when he left the
city, about 20 sail of vessels were falling down to the Hook, said to have
troops on board.

19th. -- The 2d and 5th Massachusetts, regiments were ordered to go into
garrison at West-Point, and the 7th regiment to join the army; it had before
been in garrison. The same day, intelligence was received from New York, that
there had been a naval engagement off the Chesapeak, between 19 sail of British
men-of-war, and 24 French ships of the line: the story was so badly told in
New York, that there was good grounds to conclude that the British had received
a severe drubbing. On the 17th, when a packet arrived at New York, 3,000 people
were said to be waiting on the wharves to learn the news, but not a word
transpired; nor did the countenance of the officer who landed, appear to beam
with the smiles of fortune. The enemy had taken a number of heavy cannon from
the grand battery, which were put on board ship. The troops still remained on
board the transports, and had fallen down to the Hook. A mortal sickness
prevailed in Delancy's corpse, at Morrissania, which was much reduced in its
numbers.

22d. -- Intelligence was received, that the British fleet had been pretty
severely handled by the French, and some of the ships were considerably
damaged: that the inhabitants were in great consternation in New York: many
were packing up their goods: that Arnold's loss at New London, in both killed
and wounded, was very considerable: that the 38th, 47th and 50th regiments were
on that expedition, and then considered as unfit for duty. Genesis Sir Henry
Clinton was said to be embarked with the troops, report said from 7 to 8
thousand; among them the British and Hessian grenadiers, light-infantry, 42d
regiment, etc.

24th. -- A grand forage was made below the lines. The British fleet returned
to the Hook on the 20th. The Prudente of 64 guns, had gone down in a miserable
condition to join the fleet; and the Robuste of 74 guns, had hauled down nearly
opposite to the city. The heavy cannon had been taken from Fort Washington, as
well as the grand battery.

25th. -- Forty-six loads of forage were brought off from below the lines. Mr.
Rivington published another account of the naval engagement between the fleets
on the 15th; he acknowledged that several ships were much damaged, and that two
which had come from the West Indies leaky, were more so after the engagement:
that in particular, the Terrible was so much damaged, as occasioned the taking
out her guns, etc. and setting her on fire; after which the fleet returned to
the Hook, finding it impracticable to succor Lord Cornwallis. It was said that
the troops which had embarked, (about 6,000) had debarked on Staten Island.
Other accounts stated their number not more than 4,000 -- they were impressing
and collecting wagons.

27th. -- Three deserters came in from Col. Wurmb's eorps, with their arms, etc.

28th. -- Apprehending that the enemy might have intentions of crossing over
from Staten Island to the Jersies, a detachment of 300 infantry, with light
artillery, under the command of Col. Swift, were ordered to cross the ferry the
next morning, and move as far as Ramapaugh, to be at hand to aid the militia,
in case the enemy should land in the Jersies.

29th. -- Intelligence was received from the northward, that a small party had
been sent from St. John's to Saratoga, to take a prisoner or two, for the
purpose of obtaining information; but that ^ive of the party, with the
instructions of the British commandant at St. John's, were taken and brought in
by Captain Dunham.

30th. -- Intelligence was received that Admiral Digby arrived at New York the
25th inst. with three sail of the line, and one frigate. Prince William Henry,
the King of England's third son, came in this fleet. It was said in New York,
that Lord Cornwallis's force in Virginia consisted of 5,000 regular troops, and
3,000 levies; but that behind him was a numerous continental army -- before him
a powerful French fleet. The troops on Staten Island were at this time
suspected to be planning some secret expedition; and Congress, from some
intelligence which they had received, were not without apprehensions that
Philadelphia might be their object. The militia of Pennsylvania were held in
readiness for instant service; and our General was notified to hold the army in
readiness to move, if necessary. The enemy were carefully watched. Sir Henry
Clinton was endeavoring to devise some means whereby he might relieve Lord
Cornwallis; but nothing would have diverted Genesis Washington from capturing him.
The New York papers were filled with addresses and adulations to their young
Prince; but these could not retard the advances of a WASHINGTON, or defend
Cornwallis. The fleet of Count de Grass made several captures.

October 2d. -- A detachment marched for a grand forage.

3d. -- At 3 o'clock, A. M. Major Trescott, with a detachment of 100 men from
Maj. Talmadge's command, crossed the Sound to Long Island, and completely
surprised the enemy's Fort Slonge, making 2 Captains, 1 Lieutenant, and 18 rank
and file, prisoners; of the enemy, 2 were killed, and 2 wounded; of the
Americans, none were killed, and but one wounded. Two double fortified 4
pounders, found in the fort, were damaged. One brass three-pounder, with a
number of small-arms, ammunition, clothing, British goods, etc. were brought
off. This enterprise was conducted with address and gallantry.

4th. -- The foragers returned, with upwards of 40 loads of hay.

5th. -- A detachment of dragoons were sent toward Boston, and 100 picked
infantry under Maj. Morrel were to march toward Springfield, to escort a large
sum of money (brought by Col. Laurens) to Philadelphia.

6th. -- The enemy were again embarking their troops from Staten Island; they
embarked on board the men-of-war. Considering their case as desperate, they
were determined to make one desperate attempt. Ten or twelve fireships were
prepared to sail with the fleets; they were filled with proper materials for
the purpose, and, to prevent suspicion, they were new painted, had guns, and
the appearance of some of the handsomest ships in the fleet.

8th. -- A detachment was sent on a grand forage. The same day, intelligence
was received, that a party of refugees and Indians, from Niagara, had burnt a
number of houses and barns at Warworsing; they were pursued by Col. Paulding,
but could not be come up with. Sir Henry Clinton, in his orders of the 3d,
directed 3,000 regular troops to embark on board the men-of-war as marines; it
was supposed that every thing would be ready by the 14th. Secret intelligence
had been received from Albany, that the enemy had intentions on that city; that
they would advance by different routes, and on their near approach, would be
joined by some disaffected people in the country, and the destruction of the
city be effected. Brig. Genesis Stark had been in command for some time at the
northward.

10th. -- Our General ordered the 2d New Hampshire regiment, and a detachment
of artillery, to the northward. Genesis Stark had executed a Mr. Loveless, sent in
by Capt. Dunham, as a spy.

13th. -- Intelligence was received, that the enemy had advanced to this side
of Lake George.

14th. -- The 1st New Hampshire and 10th Massachusetts regiments, with a
detachment of artillery, were ordered to Albany, were matters wore a more
serious aspect.

15th. -- Intelligence was received, that on the 28th ult. Genesis Washington took
a position in the neighborhood of York -- the enemy gave him no annoyance: on
his advancing, a body of horse paraded before the enemy's works; but retired
upon the discharge of a few shot at them.

The 29th was spent in taking another position as near the enemy's advanced
works, as could be done without placing the encampment in the range of their
shot. Some skirmishing happened between our riflemen and the yaugers, in which
the former had the advantage. At night, the enemy abandoned all their
out-posts, (some of which were very advantageous) and retired to the town; the
Americans occupied the same ground, and made lodgements at a short distance
from the enemy's lines. The heavy artillery was to be brought up as soon as
possible, and the siege pushed with vigor.

30th. -- Col. Scammell, who was officer of the day, was wounded and taken
prisoner by a party of the enemy's horse, as he was reconnoitring one of the
works which had just before been evacuated.

Our General had ordered Maj. Genesis Lord Sterling to proceed to Albany, and take
the command of the troops in that quarter; he set out for the northward about
noon on the 16th. The same day, Col. Tupper, with the 1st New Hampshire and
10th Massachusetts regiments, and a detachment of artillery, embarked at
Fishkill Landing, and arrived at Albany in 18 hours afterward. The same day,
it was learnt that the enemy's fleet at New York, was 24 or 25 sail of the
line; and that 5 or 6,000 of the best troops at New York had embarked, and were
on the point of sailing to attempt to relieve Earl Cornwallis; it was also said
that Cornwallis was short of bread, and that his meat provisions would not last
him more than the mouth out, at farthest -- he had received fresh provisions
but once after he was blockaded.

On the morning of the 17th, a horse-guard belonging to Genesis Howe's division,
consisting of a sergeant, 9 privates, and 8 waggoners, with 30 horses, were
taken by Delancy's horse a little below Croten River, where the horses had been
put to pasture contrary to orders. A Court of Inquiry was ordered to
investigate the matter.

18th. -- It was learnt, that on the preceding Saturday, a British 74 gun ship
was struck by the lightning at New York, and sustained considerable damage.

22d. -- Genesis Greene's official letter to Congress, announced that his battle
on the 8th, near Eutaw Springs, was well fought; that on the field he obtained
the victory, drove and pursued the enemy for several miles; when the enemy,
throwing themselves into a three-story brick house, a stockaded garden, and
thick brush, renewed the action, when, after some efforts to dislodge them,
Genesis Green thought it advisable to call off his troops, which was done, and
the wounded brought off, except such as were under the fire of the house. Four
brass six-pounders having had their horses killed, were also lest near the
house, in possession of the enemy. This was somewhat similar to what took place
at Germantown battle, and now very probably saved the British from a total
defeat. The close of this action barred its being called a complete victory,
although its essects proved it such. General Green, of Continental State
troops and militia, had one Lieutenant Colonel, 1 Major, 6 Captains, 8
Subalterns, 8 Sergeants, and 114 rank and file killed -- 5 Lieutenant Colonels,
13 Captains, 25 Subalterns, 32 Sergeants, and 300 rank and file wounded -- 1
Sergeant, and 40 rank and file missing -- 1 Brigadier-General of militia
wounded. Of the enemy, 500 prisoners, including the wounded, which the enemy
left behind them, were taken; and it was supposed that the killed and other
wounded of the enemy, must be nearly 600 more. Perhaps troops never fought
better than the Americans did in this battle; and of the British, General
Green observed, "the enemy fought with equal spirit, and worthy of a better
cause."

By a letter from Genesis Washington, of the 6th, it appeared that the operations
against Earl Cornwallis had then gone on but slowly, but that the trenches were
to be opened that night. The same letter observed, that some misunderstanding,
which had subsisted in Vermont, was settled; and that Genesis Enos, and the troops
under his command, were to be subject to the orders of our General.

The army in the Highlands were at this time short of flour, occasioned by the
dry season, and consequent want of water for the mills.

24th. -- A letter was received from Genesis Washington, dated at York, in
Virginia, the 12th, by which it appeared that the trenches were opened on the
night of the 6th, without being discovered by the enemy until daylight. The
approaches were carried on within 600 yards of the enemy's works, without any
loss -- the 7th and 8th were employed in erecting batteries -- on the 9th, two
batteries, one on the right, and the other on the left, were opened. The next
morning, four other batteries being completed, the whole opened a heavy fire of
cannon and mortars, which soon become so warm as to drive the enemy from their
guns, and their fire was almost totally silenced -- very little return was made
afterward. The Charron, of 44 guns, with one transport, took fire from our
shot or shells, the evening of the 10th, and were both consumed. The 11th,
another ship was destroyed in the same manner. The same night, the second
parallel was advanced within less than 400 yards of the enemy's lines. This
approach was also effected without annoyance; and on the 12th, the fatigue men
were securely covered, while they were completing the works. The same evening
there was a flying report, and which seemed to gain credit, that Earl
Cornwallis, and his army, surrendered on the 17th; and that Count de Grass had
gone out to meet Admiral Digby.

25th. -- Intelligence was received of the advance of the enemy at the
northward.

26th. -- Col. Francis, with the specie from Boston, passed the river; the
money was escorted by 40 horse of Sheldon's regiment, and 150 infantry; and
Lieut. Col. Mellen, was ordered with a detachment of infantry, to move on the
lower road as far as Morristown, keeping between the escort and the enemy.

28th. -- In the afternoon, a letter from Genesis Washington to our General,
announced the pleasing and highly important news of the complete capture of
Earl Cornwallis, and his whole army, on the 19th. Our General had assured the
army, that the moment he received the certain intelligence of the capture of
Cornwallis, it should be announced to them by the discharge of 13 cannon, near
his quarters; these were now the heralds to the army, and were instantly
answered by a like number of field pieces in every brigade on the ground.

On the 15th, two of the enemy's redoubts were stormed, one by the Americans,
and the other by the French troops, and soon carried, with but little loss. The
possession of these redoubts, gave the allied army in a great measure the
command of the other works of the enemy; who, on the 17th, beat a parley, and
on the 19th surrendered: 3,500 regular troops laid down their arms; 2,000 more
were sick and wounded, in the hospitals. These were exclusive of sailors,
negroes, etc. Earl Cornwallis was to go to England on parole, and remain a
prisoner until exchanged. The officers and men were to be exchanged as far as
the garrison of Charleston would extend; the remainder were to continue
prisoners of war; the British were to retain their private baggage. It was said
that more than 100 vessels were taken from the enemy. A detail of the prisoners
taken, was stated as follows: one Lieut. General, one Brig. General, 2
Colonels, 14 Lieut. Colonels, 16 Majors, 97 Captains, 180 Lieutenants, 55
Ensigns, 4 Chaplains, 6 Adjutants, 18 Quarter Masters, 18 Surgeons, 25 Mates,
385 Sergeants, 197 Drummers and Trumpeters, 6,039 rank and sile, 189 in the
Commissary's department -- sailors in the pay of the King, 840 -- killed during
the siege, 309 -- deserters, 44 -- 75 brass cannon, 169 iron do. 5,743 muskets
with bayonets, 915 muskets without bayonets, and 1,136 damaged muskets were
among the trophies of victory. Thus was the principal force of the enemy
crushed in the south. At the northward, the enemy were advancing, both by the
way of the Lakes and by the Mohawk River. Col. Willet, with his regiment of
New York levies, and some militia of New York, and from the western parts of
Massachusetts, were advancing to meet Maj. Ross, who, with from 500 to 700 men,
principally British troops, was making his way toward Albany, through the
settlements on the Mohawk.

29th. -- Intelligence was received that an action ^ook place the preceding
Thursday, near Johnstown, between the troops under the command of Col. Willet
and Maj. Ross.

Col. Willet having advanced until he had arrived near Maj. Ross, detached Maj.
Rowley of Massachusetts, with a body of militia, by a circuitous movement, to
get in the rear of the enemy, with orders, that as soon as he heard the firing
in the front, to fall on them. Maj. Rowley performed his maneuver accordingly;
and as soon as Col. Willet judged that the Major had gained the rear of the
enemy, he made a vigorous charge on their front, when they immediately gave
way, and to all appearance the Colonel was nearly in the grasp of victory,
when, all at once, without any visible occasion the levies came to a stand, and
then immediately began to fall back, the enemy facing about and charging
vigorously; the Colonel's brass field-piece and ammunition tumbrel fell into
the hands of the enemy, and a rout seemed to be taking place, when Maj. Rowley,
not knowing what had taken place in the front, commenced a brisk attack on the
enemy's rear; this instantly threw them into confusion; the levies rallied in
the front, and fought with redoubled bravery; the field-piece and tumbrel were
retaken, and the enemy put to a most complete rout, and pursued until the
levies, militia, and some Oneida Indians who were with Col. Willet, were worn
down with fatigue. It was not possible to ascertain the number of the enemy's
slain; for, to use the words of the reporting officer, "Unless the swamps and
rivers, in which they fell, were to report the killed, it was impossible to
make a return of them." Major Butler, so frequently a troublesome partizan
officer on the frontiers, was killed by the Indians, as he was passing a river.
Fifty-two prisoners were taken and brought in; and Major Ross went off in a
direction into the woods, where he and his troops must have suffered extremely
for provisions, etc. -- Of the levies and militia with Col. Willet, 1
Lieutenant and 12 rank and file were killed; 1 Captain, 2 Lieutenants, and 20
rank and file were wounded; 1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant, and 3 privates, missing.
Thus were the designs of the enemy also frustrated in the north.

The Corporation of the city of Albany were so much impressed with the
seasonable and effectual exertions, made by our General, to save their city
from destruction, that they sent him the following very polite address.

ALBANY, October 22, 1781. SIR,
THREATENED as this city and the frontiers of the State have been, with
destruction, from an enemy, who, forgetting the rights of humanity, and the
customs of war, adopted by civilized nations, have hitherto waged it with all
the spirit of the most savage barbarism, -- we cannot reflect but with pleasure
and gratitude on the alacrity with which you have pursued the intentions of the
Commander in Chief, in affording with so much dispatch a competent support to
oppose the enemy: permit us, therefore, to render you our unfeigned thanks, and
to assure you that the Corporation of the city of Albany can never be unmindful
of your attention; and we entertain not the least doubt, but that similar
sentiments influence every inhabitant who has experienced the advantage of your
generous exertions.

We are, Sir, with the greatest respect and esteem, your most obedient, humble
Servants.

By order of the Corporation,

(Signed) ABRA. TEN BROECK, Mayor.

The Hon. Maj. Genesis HEATH.

31st. -- The army in the Highlands, celebrated the glorious victory obtained
over Lord Cornwallis. The whole army was under arms in one line; the artillery
interspersed with the brigades to which it was attached: at 12 o'clock, the
army was reviewed by the General; at one, a grand feu-de-joy was fired; after
which, all the officers dined together, at a table spread in the field, and
formed a great square, where great festivity and social mirth prevailed. The
soldiery had an extra boon on the occasion; and, to crown the whole, in the
midst of the joy around the table, an officer approached our General, and
informed him, that, at the request of the prisoners in the provost, (who were
pretty numerous) he was desired to represent that their hearts expanded with
joy on account of the glorious victory obtained by their illustrious Commander
in Chief -- that they lamented they could not express it with their comrades in
arms; but that they did it heartily in their confinement, and solicited the
General's goodness in an order for something to cheer their spirits. This was
instantly done, with an additional order to the officer of the provost guard,
to set every prisoner in confinement at liberty. The promulgation of this order
drew a shout of approbation from the whole body of the officers at the table;
and probably had a better effect on the discipline of the army, than a
continuation of confinement, and exemplary punishment of the culprits, could
have produced. The general order of the day directed, that, "As soon as the
feu-de-joy is over, the arms, ammunition, etc. are immediately to be put in
perfect order for instant action. All guards, pickets, and sentinels to be
vigilant and alert on their posts;" which, notwithstanding the joy of the day,
was strictly observed.

On this occasion there were rejoicings in all parts of the United States: one
instance seems to be worthy of notice; the company collected had determined to
burn Genesis Arnold in effigy, for his treachery at West-Point; just as they were
going to commit the effigy to the flames, one of the company observed, that one
of Arnold's legs was wounded when he was fighting bravely for America, that
this leg ought not to be burnt, but amputated; in which the whole company
agreed; and this leg was taken off, and safely laid by.

November 3d. -- At night, the escort with the southern mail, who had put up at
Col. Cooper's, in Clark's Town, were attacked by a gang of villains, who fired
into the house, and killed the Sergeant dead on the spot, and wounded Capt.
Champion, of Connecticut, who had put up at the same house, in the shoulder:
the Corporal of the escort behaved well, threw the mail behind a bed, and
defended the house -- the assailants made off.

The same day, the foragers returned from below the lines, with a large
quantity of forage, and two prisoners, taken near Col. Phillips's.

5th. -- A Hessian yauger came in, with his horse and equipments complete.

7th. -- Two deserters came in from New York; they left the city the evening
before -- they were very intelligent; by them it was learnt that the British
fleet returned to Sandy Hook, the preceding Saturday was a week -- that no
action happened while they were at sea -- that the troops were disembarked from
the men-of-war, but remained on board the transports -- that Genesis Sir Henry
Clinton landed on Long Island, and came across to the city.

8th. -- Intelligence was received from the northward, that the enemy did not
establish a post at Ticonderoga, but were returning toward Canada; and the
militia which had been called out, were dismissed. The British at New York, at
this time, wished to strike some of the posts in the Highlands, but did not
attempt any of them. The army was short of flour, but amply supplied with meat.

About this time, our General received a letter from Genesis Washington, dated at
York, (Virginia) October 27th, 1781; in which, among other things, the
Commander in Chief observes: "There will be no occasion for forwarding on any
more beef cattle, from the northward, for this army. Should there be a greater
quantity of cattle sent from the New England States, than the daily consumption
of your army shall require, I would wish the surplus might be salted (if
practicable) at some convenient place on the North River; otherwise, it will be
necessary for you to give orders to the Agents and Commissaries, to prevent
their sending more cattle than you shall have occasion for." This was the good
fruit of the systematic arrangement.

12th. -- Genesis Glover, with his own brigade, marched for the lines, in order to
cover a grand forage.

13th. -- Lieut. Deforester, of the Connecticut line, with 25 continental
soldiers, and Capt. Lockwood, with 15 volunteers, including Lieutenants Hull
and Mead, of the Connecticut State troops, took an armed sloop of 10
carriage-guns, with 25 soldiers on board. Lieut. Deforester, and those with
him, behaved with great address and gallantry.

16th. -- Brig. Genesis Glover returned from the grand forage; during the forage,
one of the enemy was killed, and two taken prisoners; a quantity of corn, hay,
etc. and about 40 swine, were brought off.

17th. -- The 3d Massachusetts brigade moved to their ground of cantonment,
south of the north redoubt, where they built their huts.

19th. -- Admiral Digby remained at New York, with seven sail of the line, five
of 74, and two of 64 guns, two fifties, two frigates, one 20 gun ship, and two
sloops of war; the remainder of the British fleet, under the command of Admiral
Greaves, sailed from Sandy Hook the preceding Monday, for the West Indies; a
great number of shipping, perhaps 300 sail, were lying in New York harbor; the
enemy and inhabitants appeared much dejected.

20th. -- Col. Tupper, with the 10th Massachusetts regiment, a detachment of
artillery, etc. arrived at West-Point, from Albany.

23d. -- The Connecticut line marched to their cantonment, back of Constitution
Island, and the corpse of artillery to West-Point. The same day, Maj. Genesis Lord
Sterling returned to the army, from Albany.

24th. -- Our General removed his quarters from the Continental Village to
Robinson's Farm, for winter quarters. The army in want of flour and forage.

28th. -- The 1st Massachusetts brigade moved to their cantonment, back of
West-Point.

December 2d. -- The militia which had been called out for 3 months, were
returning home. They had served with much reputation, and done good service for
their country.

4th. -- Capt. Sacket, of the New York levies, near Harrison's Purchase, below
the lines, having gone a small distance from his detachment, on the morning of
the 2d, was taken prisoner by a party of the enemy. The enemy afterward
attacked Lieut. Mosher, to whom the command of the detachment fell; Lieut.
Mosher and the detachment behaved with great bravery, repulsed the enemy,
killed one of them and two horses, and wounded eight of the enemy; among them a
Capt. Kipp, said mortally; Colonel Holmes and Capt. Kipp had their horses
killed under them. The levies had not a man killed or wounded.

The army were now busily employed in building their huts, which they
prosecuted with great expedition, and soon rendered them comfortable as to
shelter; but many of the troops were in a most naked and distressed condition
as to clothing; but relief was daily arriving from the eastward.

8th. -- The officers and soldiers, who had been in Virginia, were now
returning to the army. Some of the soldiers brought the smallpox with them.

12th. -- The river was frozen down to Fishkill Landing.

The 13th was a general Thanksgiving Day; a large company of the officers of
the army dined with our General.

24th. -- The Clothier-General was issuing the new clothing to the regimental
Pay-Masters -- a most necessary piece of business. Congress about this time, by
resolutions which they passed, called upon the Legislatures of the respective
States, to complete their quotas of the army by the first of March ensuing,
Congress being determined to push the late successes, until the enemy were
driven from America. The preceding day, viz. the 23d, Capt. Williams, of the
New York levies, (stationed on the lines) with 25 volunteer horse, made an
excursion to Morrissania, where they took and brought off prisoners, one
Captain, one Lieutenant, and seven privates, of Delancy's corpse, without the
loss of a man. Capt. Williams conducted this enterprise with address and
gallantry. Capt. Pritchard moved down with a detachment of continental troops,
to cover the horse, if necessary; but the enemy did not come out.

26th. -- Five deserters came in from Arnold's corpse, with their horses, etc.
complete: they were a patrole to a foraging party, near Col. Phillips's. An
embarkation of troops was taking place at New York, for Charleston and
Savannah; Genesis Leslie having written, that without a reinforcement he could not
maintain his posts.

27th. -- Free Masons celebrated the feast of St. John, etc.

31st. -- The river was a little freed of the ice. -- Thus closed the year
1781, a year which will be memorable in the annals of the United States of
America, for the capture of Earl Cornwallis and his army -- for several
well-fought battles in the south by Genesis Green and the British, in that
quarter -- for the Count de Grasse's having visited our coast with the most
formidable fleet ever before in these seas -- and for general successes on the
American arms, under the smiles of Divine Providence, in every quarter. May the
new year be rendered more auspicious in the completion of the American warfare,
and in the establishment of the United States in the full acknowledgment of
independence, peace and happiness.

1782. January 1st. -- A new mode of supplying the army by contract commenced,
under the conduct of Comfort Sands and Co. contractors.

7th. -- Nine soldiers had then died of the smallpox: it was spreading, and it
was determined to inoculate such as had not had the distemper; which took place
in the Connecticut line on the 11th.

11th. -- Capt. Hunnewell, of New York, with a number of volunteer horse,
covered by Maj. Trescott, with a detachment of continental troops, made an
excursion to Morrissania, took and brought off prisoners Capt. Totten, and
three privates of Delancy's corpse; it was the intent to have captured the
Colonel, but he was absent from his quarters. A party of the enemy's horse
collected and pursued Capt. Hunnewell, but they were checked by Major Trescott,
and no injury was sustained.

14th. -- It was learnt, that on the 4th, a fleet of 25 sail of victuallers
arrived at New York from Cork, under convoy of the Quebec frigate; ten sail
more were left at Charleston, where the whole touched.

16th. -- The river was hard frozen again, and was passable on the ice, from
West-Point to Constitution Island. The same day, a sergeant and four dragoons
came in from Arnold's corpse, with six horses and furniture complete. The sixth
dragoon would not come off, on which the others took from him his horse, cloak,
sword, etc. They deserted from a foraging party, and reported that a great part
of the corpse would desert, when opportunity offered.

17th. -- Three dragoons came in from Arnold's corpse, with their horses, etc.
complete; and one prisoner taken by our guides, near Morrissania, was sent up.

18th. -- Lieut. Hiwill, crossing the river on the ice, fell through, but
fortunately got out again.

19th. -- It was communicated, that about the month of the preceding October,
one -- was offered two thousand guineas to take Genesis Washington, and five
hundred to take and bring in Gov. Read.

20th. -- News was received, that the Marquis de Boullie, Governor of
Martinico, had recaptured the Island of St. Eustatia, where he made prisoners
of 670 men. The Count De Grass, with 31 sail of the line, had arrived at
Martinico before the 6th of December. The British fleet from New York had
arrived at Barbados.

24th. -- Some uneasiness having taken place on account of the issues of
provisions under the contract, the officers commanding brigades were ordered,
on the part of the army, to endeavor an adjustment with the contractors, who
went for the purpose.

28th. -- A man and his horse fell through the ice, near West-Point; several
soldiers lent their assistance, but in vain -- both were drowned.

31st. -- The whole of the troops who had not before had the smallpox, were
then under the operation of inoculation -- their number near 2,000; several had
died, but in general it was very favorable.

February 8th. -- News was received, that the Duke de Lauzun, who carried to
France the news of the capture of Earl Cornwallis, arrived in France in 23 days
after he left the Chesapeak; that there were great rejoicings in France on the
occasion, and also for the birth of a Dauphin.

10th. -- The river had been passable on the ice for several days, at King's
Ferry. On the preceding Thursday, about 50 of Delancy's horse came out within
four miles of Shapequa, where they halted. On the 8th, they moved toward
North-Castle, but turned off by Wright's Mills; from thence to Kingstreet, and
toward Horseneck; they fell in with a small guard of Genesis Waterbury's --
killed one, and made four prisoners; they also took two or three inhabitants,
plundered two houses, and returned. About this time, a detachment from the
Jersey line made an attempt on the refugee post at Bergen, but were repulsed.

17th. -- The King of England's speech to his Parliament came to hand: this
speech was more moderate than any before had been, and an inclination to
pacification was discernable.

20th. -- Two deserters came in from Arnold's corpse, and also two Hessians; ten
had come in, during the course of two or three days.

21st. -- The enemy were out toward Bedford. About this time, nine or ten
thousand stand of arms, and a large quantity of powder, brought from France by
Col. Laurens, were brought from Boston to Fishkill.

23d. -- A detachment, consisting of 150 men, properly officered, under the
command of Maj. Maxwell, marched for Stamford, to cover that part of the
country.

27th. -- Col. Sumner arrived from Massachusetts; he brought on about 2,000
suits of clothes for the army. The day before, a Mr. Dyckman, one of our guides
on the lines, with 13 volunteer horsemen, made an excursion to Morrissania,
took five prisoners of Delancy's corpse, and five horses; on their return, they
were pursued by a party of the enemy's horse, who coming rather too near, the
brave volunteers faced about, charged vigorously, took one man prisoner with
his horse, and put the rest to flight. The enemy again appeared in some force
at a distance, but dared not to renew the attack. About this time, a fleet of
transports sailed from New York to the southward; it was conjectured to bring
away troops.

March 3d. -- The river was so freed of ice, that the General's barge crossed
to West-Point. Two prisoners of war taken from Delancy's corpse, were sent up.
Accounts from Massachusetts announced an uneasiness among the people respecting
the burden of taxes; and that there had been Conventions in the counties of
Hampshire and Berkshire.

4th. -- Capt. Hunnewell, with a body of volunteer horse, backed by the
infantry under the command of Maj. Woodbridge, made an excursion to
Morrissania. The horse proceeded down between the British fort No. 8, and the
cantonment of Delancy's corpse, and having turned the cantonments between
daybreak and sunrise, they entered pellmell. The enemy were completely
surprised, and fled in every direction; some were cut down on the spot, others
so badly wounded as not to be able to be removed. Some of the enemy availed
themselves of positions where the horse could not assail them, from whence they
began to fire on the horse; this occasioned the firing of the alarm guns at No.
8. The horse having nearly accomplished their design, moved off, taking the
East-Chester road, on which Maj. Woodbridge had posted the infantry in
ambuscade. Capt. Hunnewell had brought off one Subaltern and 20 men prisoners,
and 20 horses. The enemy in the vicinity collected a number of horse, backed by
light-infantry, and pursued Capt. Hunnewell until he came to Maj. Woodbridge.
The enemy were drawn into the ambuscade, who made one or two discharges on
them, on which they broke and retired, but soon returned to the charge;
skirmishing ensued, and continued to a considerable distance. Of the Americans,
two privates were killed -- Mr. Dyckman, one of the guides, a brave and active
man, mortally wounded, and three privates slightly wounded.

The enemy at New York were now contemplating means for their own defense,
against the next campaign; and it was determined to open a canal and strong
lines from the Hudson to the East River, at some distance from the city. The
canal was to be deep and wide; 2,000 men were employed on the works on one day,
300 of whom were inhabitants. The same number were to be furnished daily. These
preparations were a defensive shield for the time of approaching negotiation;
for from the debates and speeches in the British Parliament, the olive branch
was evidently putting forth its buds.

10th. -- Two soldiers, belonging to the 6th Massachusetts regiment, having
some words respecting their mess, one of them struck the other with his fist a
blow on the head, and killed him dead on the spot. About the same time, an
inhabitant, apprehending that some soldiers were about to rob his hen-roost,
discharged a musket out of a window, by which a soldier was killed.

13th. -- Maj. Genesis Lincoln, Secretary at War, arrived at the army, on his way
to Philadelphia.

At this time it was learnt, that on the 13th of the preceding December there
were strong debates in the British House of Commons, respecting the carrying on
the war in America. When Sir James Lowther made a motion, that the mode which
had been pursued was ineffectual, many Members spoke for and against the
motion; when it was put, there was against the motion, 220; for it, 179;
majority; 41.

14th. -- Lieut. Harris, with six men belonging to Capt. Vermille's company of
militia, having obtained intelligence of a party of Delancy's corpse being at a
house near Mile-Square, had the address to surprise the whole party, consisting
of 12, killed one and made four prisoners.

21st. -- A duel was fought at West-Point, between Capt. -- and Lieut. --,when
the former was killed and the latter wounded: they fought with postols, at
about ten feet distance. The Lieutenant absconded.

25th. -- News was received, that the Islands of St. Christopher's and Nevis
surrendered to the arms of his most Christian Majesty, on the 12th of the
preceding February. The terms granted by the French commandants were truly
noble, and reflect the highest honor on them.

26th. -- About this time, putrid fevers were prevalent among the American
troops, and in some instances proved mortal. About this time, an embarkation of
about 800 troops took place at New York; their destination not publicly known.

28th. -- The whole army were ordered to be in readiness for instant action, or
to march to such place or places, as might stand in need of aid. An additional
company was ordered to the lines, and another to Smith's Clove, for the safety
of the Commander in Chief, who was on his way from Philadelphia to Newburgh,
and was to pass the Clove, on the succeeding Saturday or Sunday. News was
received, that the citizens of London and Westminster had petitioned the King,
in the strongest terms, to relinquish the American war.

29th. -- Five deserters came in from Arnold's corpse, with their arms, etc.
complete. The enemy were busily employed on their canal and lines: a number of
heavy cannon had been put on board ship, at New York. About this time, the
British cruisers were but too successful against the Americans, at sea. A ship
of 18 guns, had, for some time, taken a station off Spitten-Devil Creek.

31st. -- His Excellency Genesis Washington arrived at Newburgh; he had been
absent from the main army since the 19th of the preceding August, having spent
the winter at Philadelphia, after the capture of Earl Cornwallis.

April 2d. -- Our General went up to Newburgh, to pay his respects to the
Commander in Chief, where he dined, and returned at evening: Genesis Washington
established his quarters at Newburgh. On the night of the 1st, a party of Capt.
Pray's men, from the water-guard, being on shore, on the east side of the
Hudson, fell in with a party of our own militia, who, in the dark, attacked
each other; four of the latter were wounded, and eleven (being the whole of the
party) were taken prisoners, before the mistake was discovered. An express, on
his way from St. John's to New York, with several letters, one in characters,
had been taken.

4th. -- The following [extract] was published in the general orders.

HEADQUARTERS, NEWBURGH, April 4th, 1782.
The Commander in Chief, having returned, and resumed the command of the main
army, presents his thanks to Maj. Genesis Heath, and the troops which have been
employed under his orders, for having preserved the important posts committed
to his charge, and covered the country so successfully against the depredations
of the enemy, during the absence of the General.

6th. -- The Commander in Chief visited West-Point, and reviewed the first
Massachusetts brigade. On his arrival at the Point, he was saluted by the
discharge of 13 cannon.

8th. -- Four deserters came in, three from the 42d British regiment, and a
seaman from the ship Venger; this ship, stationed in the North River, mounted
24 guns, and had two gun-boats with her. The enemy continued at work on their
canal and lines, which they were making very strong. An incredible number of
fascines had been made, during the winter, on Long Island and Staten-Island,
strongly bound with eight bands; these were placed in the face of the work,
with five pickets in each fascine.

9th. -- The Commander in Chief reviewed the 3d Massachusetts brigade and 10th
regiment, and dined with our General. The same day, two deserters came in from
the ship in the river. The same night, an armed brig, and three boats, full of
men, came up the Hudson, and came to anchor a little above the place where our
guard-boats rendezvous, at Nyack; they were early discovered, and the alarm
given. The soldiers landed at Haverstraw, about one o'clock on the morning of
the 10th, and took 3 or 4 militiamen. It was supposed that their design was to
have taken our whale-boats: they were refugees and sailors. Not knowing but
this might have been a feint, to an attack on the lines, 200 men were detached
for their support, if necessary. The enemy returned down the river, in the
afternoon, having, in addition to the militia, above mentioned, taken two of
Capt. Pray's men, who were out, burning coal, and two others who were over at
Tarrytown, fishing, and destroyed some seines. It was learnt, from the
northward, that the enemy were repairing and building boats at St. John's, and
bringing up provisions to that place; this rendered it probable, that the enemy
would be troublesome in that quarter, the ensuing campaign. Several parties of
Indians had been skulking about, on the Mohawk River, had killed a soldier and
a lad, and had taken a soldier prisoner, and burnt a building.

14th. -- Three deserters came in from Robinson's corpse; they made their escape
from Long Island, by crossing the Sound in a canoe. They reported, that the
enemy were under great apprehensions of an attack, and were making every
preparation for defense; that 62,000 fascines had been made on Long Island,
during the winter and spring. A fleet of transports had arrived at New York,
from Charleston. Lines were traced out on Long Island, from the great fort to
the marsh, near M'Gowen's mill-dam.

18th. -- It was learnt, that the enemy had laid an embargo on the shipping at
New York. News was received, that Holland had formed an alliance with France,
and that a Spanish fleet had arrived in the West Indies.

19th. -- The General Officers, and officers commanding brigades and regiments,
met at our General's quarters, in consequence of orders from the Commander in
Chief, to give an opinion what measures ought to be adopted, in consequence of
the horrid and brutal murder of a Capt. Huddy, who had commanded a block-house
at Tom's River, in the Jerfies, and had been taken prisoner by the enemy, and
carried to New York, where he was closely confined, under guard, and in the
sugar-house, and on board a vessel, in irons, and then carried over to Bergen,
in the Jersies, and hanged by the refugees, a Capt. Lippincot directing the
execution. This was done, under the pretense that Capt. Huddy had been
concerned in the death of one Philip White, although White was killed by the
guard, from whom he endeavored to make his escape, and Capt. Huddy was at the
same time a prisoner with the enemy. Huddy was left hanging on a tree, with the
following label fastened on his breast: "Up goes Huddy for Philip White." This
wanton and cruel act, so exasperated the inhabitants of New Jersey, that they
drew up a petition, signed by a vast number of respectable citizens, claiming
of Genesis Washington, as the Military Guardian of their country, the obtainment
of justice for this horrid act, or retaliation in case justice was refused.
Indeed, painful as the idea of retaliation must be to the feelings of humanity,
it seemed now to be the only preventative of more horrid murders. Genesis
Washington, with his wonted prudence and talent for investigation, free of all
bias, ordered the officers to assemble as before mentioned, and directed our
General to state to them the occasion of their being convened, and then the
following questions: "Shall there be retaliation for the murder of Capt. Huddy?
On whom shall it be inflicted? And how shall the victim be designated?" The
officers assembled were forbidden to converse on the questions submitted to
them, each one was to write his own opinion, seal it up, and address it to the
Commander in Chief. By this mode of procedure, all the influence which some
officers might have on others was prevented, and the spontaneous feelings of
every individual officer collected. Col. Humphries and Col. Trumbull, of the
General's family, attended the Council, and every direction of the Commander in
Chief was most strictly observed. It was found that the officers were unanimous
in their opinion, that retaliation ought to take place; that it should be
inflicted on an officer of equal rank, viz. a Captain; not under convention or
capitulation, but one who had surrendered at discretion; and that in
designating such an one, it should be done by lot. The Commander in Chief was
pleased to approve of the opinion of the officers, and wrote to the British
commander, demanding justice for the wanton murder of Capt. Huddy; informing
the British General at the same time, that if justice was not obtained,
retaliation would most assuredly take place. At the same time, arrangements
were put in train for retaliation; the names of several British officers, of
equal rank and circumstances, were thrown together, and a fair and impartial
lot was drawn, when young Capt. Asgill was taken; he was of a noble family, his
father was dead, and on him were the fond hopes of his mother, Lady Asgill,
placed. Indeed a more affecting scene than this can scarcely open; an innocent
young man, doomed to suffer for the wanton offense of another, which deed no
doubt his soul despised; and the tender breast of a mother rent in twain on the
fate of her darling son. Nor were the feelings of the Great WASHINGTON unmoved
on this occasion; they were too manifest not to be observed, and could only be
curbed by the invariable resolution, in every exigence, to exhibit the
administrator of justice. It was months before this tragic business closed; and
that the reader may have the whole narrative together, it will be carried
forward to such periods as will render a return back to the proper chain of
events necessary.

Genesis Sir Guy Carleton, who had come into the command in chief at New York,
wrote to Genesis Washington, assuring him of the fullest satisfaction.

Sir Guy ordered a Court Martial for the trial of Capt. Lippencot, who was
charged with the murder of Capt. Huddy. The Court Martial had set, and given in
their proceedings to Genesis Carleton, who wrote a letter to Genesis Washington,
requesting a passport for Chief Justice Smith, to repair to the headquarters
of the American army, in order to lay before the Commander in Chief the
proceedings of the Court Martial, with other documents, which he (Sir Guy) had
no doubt would give full satisfaction.

Upon Genesis Washington's receiving the letter from Sir Guy Carleton, he informed
our General that he should not consent to, or give a passport to Mr. Chief
Justice Smith, to come up with the proceedings of the Court Martial on
Lippencot; but that he would send him (Genesis Heath) down to Col. Phillips's,
near King's Bridge, to meet such officer of equal rank, as Sir Guy Carleton
might think proper to send out to meet him, with the proceedings of the
Court Martial, etc.; and on the 30th of July the Commander in Chief wrote to
our General as follows:

HEADQUARTERS, 30th July, 1782. DEAR SIR,
FOR your information, and that you may know the object of your mission, I
enclose to you a transcript of my letter to Sir Guy Carleton, which is herewith
committed to your care, to be forwarded as soon as possible.

Before the time of your going to Phillips's house, I shall have the pleasure
of seeing you, or conveying to you in writing my sentiments more fully on the
subject of your meeting.

With great regard, etc. (Signed) G. WASHINGTON.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

(Copy.)
HEADQUARTERS, July 31st, 1782. SIR,
IN reply to your letter of the 25th, I have to inform your Excellency, that
Maj. Genesis Heath, second in command, with two Aids-de-Camp, will have the honor
of meeting an officer of equal rank, of your Excellency's appointment, at the
house of Mr. Phillips, on the 5th day of August next. At that time Genesis Heath
will receive from your officer the proceedings of the Court Martial on Capt.
Lippencot, for the murder of Capt. Huddy, together with such other documents as
you shall think proper to communicate.

The assurance which your Excellency has given me, of the fullest satisfaction
in this matter, is as pleasing as it is interesting.

Your Excellency's propositions, contained in your letter of the 7th, have been
communicated to Congress, and are now under the consideration of that
honorable body; as soon as I am favored with their determination, your
Excellency may be assured I will do myself the honor to communicate it.

I have the honor, etc. (Signed) G. WASHINGTON.

Sir GUY CARLETON.

By his Excellency George Washington, Esquire General and Commander in Chief of the
forces of the United States of America. To Maj. Genesis HEATH.
SIR,
HIS Excellency Sir Guy Carleton, having requested a passport for Chief Justice
Smith, to repair to the headquarters of the American army, in order to lay
before me the proceedings of a Court Martial, on the trial of Capt. Lippencot
for the murder of Capt. Huddy, with other documents and explanations, which, he
says, "he has no doubt will give full satisfaction:"

I do, therefore, from an earnest desire to proceed with candor and deliberate
justice, appoint you to meet an officer of equal rank, at the house of Col.
Phillips, on Monday the 5th instant, or at any other time or place which you
may think more convenient, for the purpose of receiving the proceedings and
documents above mentioned, with such explanations in writing as he may think
proper to communicate. The papers you shall receive, you will transmit to me as
soon as your business is concluded, together with a report of your proceedings
therein.

Given at headquarters, this 3d day of August, 1782. (Signed) G. WASHINGTON.
By his Excellency's command.

The following instructions accompanied the foregoing commission:

To Maj. Genesis HEATH.
SIR,
HAVING desired you to meet an officer from Sir Guy Carleton, for the purpose
mentioned in your appointment and authority, you will proceed to execute said
business; in the course of which, you may inform the officer you meet, that, as
I have no connection with, or control over any person in the line in which Mr.
Smith walks; as the question before us is in my opinion purely of a military
nature, and reduceable to this single point, whether the perpetrator of the
wanton and cruel murder of Huddy is to be given up, or a British officer to
suffer in his place, that I could see no propriety or necessity in an interview
with the Chief Justice.

If you should find that the design of Sir Guy Carleton is to procrastinate
this business, to envelope it in as much intricacy and difficulty as possible,
or that he means to justify it by recrimination and law cases, thereby
attempting to avert our purposes of retaliation, you may assure him, (unless
you shall judge it expedient to leave me more at liberty) if not explicitly, at
least by strong insinuation, that he will miss his aim; and that my deliberate
and dispassionate proceedings in this case are intended to give him, as he now
has had, full time to determine whether the guilty person or an innocent
officer shall be made the subject of retaliation.

You will be particularly cautious, that whatever passes in the conference you
are to have, which is to be considered as official, be committed to writing,
that no omissions or misconceptions may be plead hereafter; and you will inform
the officer in explicit terms, if you find the matter is not likely to end as
justice dictates and we could wish, that all oral conversation will be excluded
from the official report of these proceedings now, or any share in the account
of them hereafter, or the recital of them will be considered as unfair, and an
evident departure from that line of rectitude which we wished to pursue, for an
unbiassed world to judge by.

If, notwithstanding my letter to Sir Guy Carleton, requesting his appointment
of an officer of your rank to meet you on this business, he should send Mr.
Chief Justice Smith, you may, at your discretion, either receive the
proceedings of the Court, and such other documents as he is merely the bearer
of, without going into any explanation with this gentleman, or refuse the
whole, as the circumstances of the moment shall dictate to you. Or if this
gentleman should be an attendant on the officer aforementioned, you may refuse
to admit him at your conference. In the first case, you may either return with
the proceedings, etc. or you may write Sir Guy Carleton, that you will wait a
given time for an officer, agreeable to the purport of my letter to him of the
30th of last month.

Given at headquarters, Newburgh, August 3d, 1782. (Signed) G. WASHINGTON.


In the afternoon of the same day, our General received the following letter
from the Commander in Chief;

HEADQUARTERS, August 3d, 1782. DEAR SIR,
BY the contents of Sir Guy Carleton's letter, which came enclosed in yours of
this day, I find it is unnecessary for you to proceed to Phillips's house.
Disappointed in not obtaining a passport for Mr. Chief Justice Smith to come
out, he will not, he says, trouble an officer of your rank to be the bearer of
a bundle of papers only; but adds, they shall be sent out in the ordinary
course of conveyance. Your letter to Col. Trumbull, covering the new adopted
system of issues, etc. is received.

(Signed) G. WASHINGTON.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

Not long after, the proceedings of the Court Martial on Capt. Lippencot, for
the murder of Capt. Huddy were sent out; Lippencot was acquitted by the Court,
and it appeared that the British Commanders in Chief, both Sir Henry Clinton,
and Sir Guy Carleton, disapproved the act. It seemed that a kind of Board of
Directors who had a subordinate direction of the refugee operations, were some
how concerned in this business, and that argument and some artifice were
necessary to smooth it over. However, Genesis Washington, painful as his task was,
was not to be diverted from justice or retaliation; but execution was
suspended. Lady Asgill, learning the unhappy situation of her darling son, with
much policy, and equal success, applied to the Count de Vergennes, then Prime
Minister of France, who spread the matter before the King and Queen: indeed it
was a subject that needed no extra coloring to fix it on the mind of humanity.
The King and Queen listened to the request; and Congress was addressed in a
representation, that the French, as well as American arms, were victorious at
York; and that the former seemed to have some share in the prisoners; and
hinted that it would be pleasing to the French Court, if young Asgill was
pardoned -- which Congress complied with: and although reparation for the
wanton murder of Capt. Huddy was not fully obtained, yet it is highly probable,
that the firm and determined conduct of Genesis Washington, on the occasion, put a
final stop to any further repetition of the kind.

Sir Guy Carleton was probably the greatest General which the British had in
America, during the war; and it was fortunate for the Americans, that he was so
long kept within the limits of Canada. In him were combined many of those great
qualifications which form the General.

When Sir Guy visited the American prisoners in consinement in Canada, he
addressed them with all the tenderness of a father; he observed to the young
prisoners, that he did not blame them, it was the fault of the designing men of
their country, that had led them into difficulty; that he would not hold them
in consinement, but would send them home to their fathers and friends. See here
the soothing art, that could not fail to cool the ardour of the young warrior
in the cause of his country.

To Genesis Waterbury of Connecticut, when he show him his commission, Sir Guy
observed -- "Your commission is from the proper authority of your Colony;
(Connectieut had not changed her form of government) you are no rebel, Sir; you
shall go home to your family."

Soon after Sir Guy Carleton came into the command at New York, a Connecticut
soldier, who had been a prisoner, came out to our army, and requested a pass to
go home, informing that he had given a parole to Sir Guy, not to serve again,
during the war; but he was ordered to join his regiment, which disappointed the
soldier exceedingly. Genesis Washington ordered the Commissary of Prisoners to
credit the British for one man exchanged; and informed Sir Guy that this
practice would not be allowed. Many soldiers were at that time very uneasy in
the American army -- had a conduct of this sort been allowed, many soldiers on
the out-posts and otherwise, might have gone to the enemy, have pretended they
were taken, and have come out under parole, and have gone home, to the
unspeakable injury of the army: but it was nipped in the bud -- only one other
having come out in the same way, before it was put a stop to.

We now return to take up the chain of events from which we digressed.

The 20th of April, two prisoners of war, taken near Kingstreet, were sent up
by Major Oliver.

21st. -- A Serjeant-Major deserted and came out; he reported that an
enterprise was contemplating at New York, and a number of large boats were
collecting at Turtle Bay.

24th. -- Two deserters came in from the Adamant man-of-war, of 50 guns, which
lay in the East River, against New York. Admiral Digby's flag was then hoisted
on board the Centurion. The seamen on board the ships very sickly.

The latter end of April, the Duke of Cumberland packet, Capt. Dashwood,
arrived at New York, in six weeks from England, with the March mail: by which
it was learnt, that the debates in the British Parliament on the American war,
grew more and more interesting; that a motion had been made by Genesis Conway, for
bringing in a bill, empowering the King to make peace with America.

The beginning of May, the British eruizers were very successful against the
Americans; eleven sail of vessels from Philadelphia were taken, and carried
into New York, with near 9,000 barrels of flour.

May 4th. -- This evening exhibited the most extraordinary aurora borealis ever
before seen by those who observed it.

5th. -- It was learnt, that the merchants of Edinburg, at a meeting on the 7th
of the preceding January, declared and published their sentiments and wishes
for a peace with America, and a renewal of friendship. It was also further
learnt, that it was the prevailing sense of the British House of Commons, as a
first step to an accommodation with America, to change the mode of carrying on
the war, and to act only on the defensive, on the Continent; and that the
person who should advise to offensive operations against the Americans, should
be considered as an enemy to the King and nation. At the same time, France and
Holland appeared to be making great preparations for a vigorous campaign.

6th. -- Symptoms of a dangerous mutiny were discovered in the Connecticut
line; it had been conducted with so much address, as to have been nearly
matured before it was divulged. Under the pressure of real or supposed
grievances, the soldiers of the whole line had determined, at revelle the next
morning, to have marched from their cantonment with arms, etc. complete, for
Fishkill, were they were to take a number of fieldpieces, and such ammunition
and provisions as might be necessary, and then proceed to Hartford, and there
demand of their new General Assembly that justice which they supposed was their
due. Just as the officers were going to bed, a faithful soldier, who was waiter
to an officer, came into his room, and told the officer that he could not go to
rest until he divulged to him an event which would assuredly take place the
next morning, at break of day; and that every thing was then in readiness for
it -- and laid open the whole secret. The matter was immediately communicated
to the principal officers of the line, and several soldiers were seized and
confined, and one suffered. The whole design was frustrated. Mutiny is a most
horrid ofsence in an army, which, without strict order and discipline, is but a
rope of sand. On the other hand, human nature can bear but to a certain degree,
and no further: hence any trial of human nature, beyond such a degree, is
impolitic, and unjustifiable. Of this line, it may with strict justice be said,
that their whole conduct through the war was highly meritorious.

7th. -- A stop was put to the inoculation with the smallpox.

8th. -- A prisoner was sent up, and a deserter came in.

9th. -- News was received, that there had been a total change of the British
Ministry, and that Fort St. Philip, and the whole island of Minorca,
surrendered to the Spaniards, on the 6th of the preceding February, by
capitulation.

15th. -- Eleven trusty Sergeants were sent to Massachusetts, to march on the
recruits to the army from that State.

17th. -- Two deserters came in, who reported that a packet had arrived at
New York, from England.

24th. -- Near 100 old and decrepid soldiers were collected from the different
regiments, and many of them discharged. About this time, a packet arrived at
Boston, in 25 days passage from France; the letters were immediately forwarded
to Congress.

26th. -- The 1st Massachusetts brigade was ordered to move out of its
cantonment, and encamp near the German Huts.

The United States of Holland acknowledged the independence of the United
States of America, the 28th of the preceding March.

There was a great talk of peace in New York.

In the American army great preparations had for some time been making to
celebrate the birth of the Dauphin of France. At least 1,000 men a day were
employed, under the direction of the engineers and other artists, in
constructing a most superb arbor, decorated with every emblem and device,
descriptive of the occasion, and the alliance between France and America, which
ingenuity could invent; and perhaps for any thing of the kind, constructed in
the field, was never surpassed.

31st. -- The birth of the Dauphin of France was celebrated by the American
army. An elegant dinner was provided, by order of the Commander in Chief; of
which the officers of the army, and a great number of ladies and gentlemen,
invited from the adjacent country, partook. Thirteen toasts were drank,
announced by the discharge of cannon. At evening there was a grand feu-de-joy,
opened by the discharge of 13 cannon, three times repeated. The feu-de-joy,
being fired in the dusk, had a pleasing appearance to the eye, as well as the
ear; and was so ordered for that purpose. The army was not formed in line, but
each brigade was drawn up in front of its own cantonment, or camp, on both
sides of the river; and thus were in a circle of several miles circumference,
in the center of which, the Commander in Chief, and the spectators were placed.
After the feu-de-joy, there was an exhibition of fireworks, etc.

June 2d. -- Information was received, that the island of New-Providence, and
its dependencies, were taken by the Spaniards, on the 11th of the preceding
May. The garrison, which consisted of about 200 men, were sent to Europe. The
new frigate South Carolina, built in Europe, arrived about this time in the
Delaware; she was an exceeding fine ship, mounting 28 42-pounders on one deck,
and 12 12-pounders on her quarter and fore-castle. She was commanded by
Commodore Gillon.

There had been a bloody engagement in the West Indies, the 12th of the
preceding April, between the Count De Grass and Admiral Rodney; but all the
accounts had been very vague. The British now published their account, and that
they took from the French, the Ville de Paris, of 110 guns, and 1300 men; Le
Glorieux, Le Caesar, and Le Hector, of 74 guns each; and Le Ardent, of 64 guns,
and sunk one ship of the line. They acknowledged to have had 236 men killed,
and 779 wounded; among whom were several officers. They also boasted of having
obtained a very signal advantage in the European seas, over Admiral Kempelfelt.

5th. -- It was reported, that a French fleet had been seen on the American
coast. A fleet about this time sailed from New York, eastward, through the
Sound, conjectured to be destined to Penobscot. The brigades of the American
army daily maneuvered, and fired to great acceptance.

14th. -- The British had been removing a number of heavy cannon and ordnance
stores from their works at the north end of New York island, and placing light
pieces in the room of them. A number of deserters daily came in.

24th. -- The Commander in Chief sent the following letter to our General:

HEADQUARTERS, NEWBURCH, June 24th, 1782. DEAR SIR,
I AM this moment setting out for Albany, and shall be absent a few days. I
give you this information for the regulation of your own conduct; and request,
in the mean time, you will give me any intelligence you may receive, which you
shall deem of sufficient consequence for communication by express.

(Signed) G. WASHINGTON.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

26th. -- It was learnt from Canada, that several armed vessels and a number of
batteaux, had come up Lake Champlain; there were probably about 300 men. A much
larger force, (report said 3,000) was gone or going toward Lake Ontario, to
establish a post at Oswego.

27th. -- Another ship came up the North River, and took a station near
Spitten-Devil Creek.

July 2d. -- The Commander in Chief returned from Albany.

4th. -- The army fired a grand feu-de-joy, it being the anniversary of the
Declaration of American Independence.

11th. -- At evening, the Commander in Chief wrote our General the following
letter:

HEADQUARTERS, July 11th, 1782. DEAR SIR,
I HAVE this moment received a letter from Count de Rochambeau, (by one of his
Aids, in 5 days from Williamsburg) informing me that he is on his way to
Philadelphia; that he will be there the 13th or 14th, and wishes for an
interview with me: for this purpose I shall set out in the morning, very early,
and have only to request your usual attention.

(Signed) G. WASHINGTON.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

13th. -- Two prisoners of war were sent up, and three German deserters came
in, and the next day a light dragoon, with his horse, etc. complete. About this
time, the southern mail was taken, between Philadelphia and Morristown.

18th. -- It was learnt, that on the 21st of the preceding May, Genesis Wayne
obtained a considerable advantage over the enemy, with very little loss on his
side, near Ogechee, in Georgia: the enemy retired into Savannah. About this
time, a Corporal and 8 men deserted from our block-house, at Dobb's Ferry.

21st. -- Three deserters came in. About this time, a fleet of about 40 sail
arrived at Sandy Hook, under convoy of two frigates; they were supposed to be
from Ireland.

22d. -- Three deserters came in from the British grenadiers; two others
deserted at the same time, but had not got in. The same day, four deserters
came in from the Hussar frigate, and the next day three soldiers. At this time
the cow thieves and refugees were lurking in the Highlands, and detachments
were sent out to patrol them.

26th. -- Information was received, that a party of the enemy, to the number of
4 or 500, had appeared on the Mohawk River, advancing toward Fort Herkemer.
They killed a continental soldier.

27th. -- Genesis Washington returned to Newburgh from Philadelphia.

August 2d. -- The British May and June packets had arrived at New York.
Admiral Barrington had taken a French man-of-war, of 74 guns, and several
transports, destined for the East Indies. The next day it was learnt, that a
French fleet, consisting of 12 or 13 sail of the line, and 3 frigates, had
arrived in the Chesapeak.

On the 29th ult. a bloody engagement took place off the Chesapeak, between the
French frigate Amazon, of 36 guns, and the British frigate Margaretta, which
terminated in favor of the latter.

6th. -- Information was received, that the British had evacuated Savannah in
Georgia.

8th. -- Four deserters came in from the enemy.

10th. -- The prospect of an approaching peace brightened; Genesis Sir Guy
Carleton and Admiral Digby informed Genesis Washington, that Mr. Grenville had
gone over to France on the negotiation for peace, and that the independence of
America was to be acknowledged previous to, or as an opening of the
negotiation. The refugees at New York were greatly alarmed at the prospect of
peace. Sir Guy Carleton had notified the inhabitants to meet him; and, in
Rivington's paper of the 7th, there appeared a proclamation, advising the
refugees to continue their loyalty; and make themselves easy, until the event
of the negotiation was known.

12th. -- A large stone magazine, capable of containing 1,000 barrels of
gunpowder, was begun to be erected on Constitution Island; it was built upon
the principles of Monsieur Vauban, and under the direction of Maj. Villefranche.

15th. -- It was learnt, that the French fleet, which had been at the
Chesapeak, had arrived at Boston. The British troops evacuated Savannah the
11th of July, leaving the town and works uninjured. Previous to the evacuation,
the refugees sent out to Gen Wayne, to know if they might depend on protection
in their persons and property; they were answered in the affirmative, until
they were delivered over to the civil authority, who, they were informed, must
decide on their case. When the British left the town, near 200 of the
inhabitants immediately entered the American service in the Georgia battalion.

19th. -- Three prisoners of war were sent up; they were taken near
East-Chester. Several deserters came in about the same time.

22d. -- The light-infantry of the American army moved down, and encamped near
Peek's Kill.

24th. -- Maj. Genesis Knox was in the general orders appointed to the command of
West-Point. The artillery, sappers and miners, 10th Massachusetts regiment, and
the corpse of invalids, for the garrison.

From the 25th to the 27th, inclusive, 7 deserters came in; they reported that
the sick of the British army were ordered to be sent on board the hospital
ships, and not to the hospitals on shore. The heavy baggage was also ordered to
be put on board the shipping; the officers to retain on shore no more than what
was of absolute necessity.

29th. -- An order of encampment and battle for the American army was
published. The army was to encamp in one line, with a reserve; the New Jersey
and New York troops were to form a division under the command of Maj. Genesis St.
Clair; the Connecticut troops, a division under Maj. Genesis M'Dougal; these two
divisions to form the right wing, to be commanded by Maj. Genesis Gates: the
New Hampshire brigade and first brigade of Massachusetts, to form a division
under the command of Maj. Genesis Lord Sterling; the 2d and 3d Massachusetts
brigades, a division under the command of Maj. Genesis How; these two divisions,
forming the left wing, under the command of Maj. Genesis Heath. The 2d Connecticut
and 3d Massachusetts brigades to form the reserve; and when the ground would
admit, form at 200 paces in the rear of the army. Maj. Genesis Lord Sterling was
ordered to Albany to take the command of that part of his division which was
then in that quarter.

31st. -- As many of the army as could be carried in the boats, embarked at
their respective brigade landings; and the whole of the boats being formed in
order, fell down the river to Verplank's Point, where the troops disembarked
and encamped. They made a most beautiful appearance, when in the boats and in
motion. The remainder of the army marched down by land.

September 1st. -- Information was received, that the British were on the eve
of evacuating Charleston, South Carolina. The season was remarkably dry, both
to the eastward and southward; it was with difficulty that the army could
obtain a supply of water. About this time, an embarkation of Hessian troops
took place at New York.

7th. -- There was a grand review and maneuver of the army, which gave great
satisfaction. The July packet arrived at New York about this time; it appeared
that the Marquis of Rockingham had died, that Mr. Fox and Lord Cavendish had
resigned their places, and that Lord Shelburne was appointed one of the
Secretaries of State.

14th. -- The American army was under arms to receive Genesis Count de Rochambeau;
after his reception, the army defiled before him, and returned to their
respective encampments. The French army was now arriving from the southward;
they encamped to the South of Peek's Kill as they arrived.

16th. -- The enemy made a grand forage near Volentine's Hill; Sir Guy Carleton
was out in person, as was the young Prince. The covering party, it was said,
consisted of 5 or 6,000 men; a number deserted. The American army at this time
was in great want of forage, occasioned by the dry season.

18th. -- The last of the French army arrived.

20th. -- Genesis Washington reviewed the French army; the troops made a fine
appearance. A French frigate had been run on shore in the Delaware, and taken
by the enemy.

21st. -- The American army maneuvered before the Commander in Chief, Genesis
Rochambeau, and many other officers. The troops made a handsome appearance, and
maneuvered well.

22d. -- It was learnt, that the ships-of-war and transports, at New York, were
watering and preparing for sea, and a number of regiments were under orders for
embarkation. A little before this time, Congress had authorized and empowered
Genesis Washington to adjust and finally settle the accounts subsisting between
the United States and the British government, respecting the support of the
prisoners of war on both sides; and to provide, by a general cartel, for their
greater comfort and exchange, under the great seal ratifying what he, the
Commander in Chief of their army, should agree to. Genesis Washington transferred
this power to Major-Generals Heath and Knox, whom he appointed Commissioners
for the purpose, and instructed them not to proceed to business, unless the
British Commissioners were found to be equally empowered to bring the business
to a final issue.

The time and place of meeting were agreed to by the two Commanders in Chief,
and was to be on the 25th of September, at Tappan.

24th. -- The American Commissioners sent down two of their Aids-de-Camp, to
take up the necessary quarters, and make other preparations; and a company of
light-infantry was ordered to Tappan, to furnish guards and sentinels.

25th. -- The American Commissioners embarked on board their barges, at King's
Ferry, and fell down the river to Tappan Landing, where they arrived about 2
o'clock, P. M. In less than half an hour, the British Commissioners, in two
vessels, wearing flags, came up the river, and cast anchor off the Landing. The
American Commissioners waited at the shore, and sent off their barges to aid,
in bringing the British Commissioners on shore, the river being at that time
very rough: on their reaching the shore, it was found that Lieut. Genesis Campbell
and the Hon. Mr. Elliot, who had been Lieut. Governor of New York, were the
Commissioners on the part of the British. The whole dined together, an elegant
dinner having been ordered by the American Commissioners, and politeness and
great sociability took place; and a mutual arrangment for the daily support of
the table, was agreed on, as it was expected that the business would not be
completed in less than three or four weeks, if the whole object was adjusted.

26th. -- The Commissioners interchanged copies of their respective powers;
these were to be considered until the next day, when answers were to be given
in writing, whether the powers were satisfactory on both sides. On examining
the powers, given to the British Commissioners, it appeared that their doings
would not be conclusive, until confirmed, and were very short of those held by
the American Commissioners, whose agreement and signature were to be final.

27th. -- The American Commissioners stated to the British Commissioners, that
the powers with which they were vested were inadequate to effect the
expectations of the government of the United States, and that therefore the
negotiation must be broken off. Of the great difference of the powers, the
British Commissioners were fully convinced. The American Commissioners thought
it to be their duty, when they gave their note of objections to the British
delegated powers, to hand with it a very pointed protest, in behalf of the
United States, against that conduct, on the part of the British, which had so
long delayed the settlement of the accounts for the support of the prisoners of
war, which were in the power of the United States. The Commissaries of
Prisoners, on both sides, were present, to present and support their respective
accounts; and a settlement would not only have been just, but also very
interesting to the United States.

28th. -- About 12 o'clock, at noon, the Commissioners parted with the same
politeness and good humor with which they met, and which had invariably
continued during the time they were together. Our General sent orders to the
commanding officer at Dobb's Ferry, to permit the British flags to pass down
the river; and the American Commissioners returned to camp. The day before,
(the 27th) Genesis Washington, covered by the dragoons and light-infantry,
reconnoitred the grounds on the east side of the river, below the White-Plains;
and the 29th, about noon, returned to camp.

October 3d. -- It was learnt, that the enemy had evacuated Lloyd's Neck, and
destroyed their works at that place: their works at Bergen Point, in the
Jersies, had been destroyed before that time.

5th. -- Maj. Genesis Gates arrived at camp. At this time, the horses of the army
were suffering for want of forage.

6th. -- Intelligence was received from the southward, that on the 27th of
August, Col. Laurens was killed, in a skirmish with the enemy: the loss of this
brave young officer was much regretted. The enemy, previous to their leaving
Charleston, desired to purchase some provisions; and Genesis Lessie had intimated
to Genesis Green, that if this could not be permitted, he must take the
provisions by force. The former being denied, the latter was attempted, and
Col. Laurens fell; 24 or 25 others were killed, wounded, or taken prisoners,
and one howitzer fell into the hands of the enemy.

7th. -- Intelligence was received, that Maj. Genesis Lee had died, a little
before, at Philadelphia; he had just before sold his estate, in Virginia, for
L6,100 sterling.

8th. -- The weather beginning to grow cold and blowing, all the bowers (which
were numerous and very falutary, during the hot season) were ordered to be
pulled down and removed, to prevent accidents by fire, and to admit the benefit
of the sun.

12th. -- Intelligence was received from Europe, by the arrival of a vessel in
34 days from Amsterdam, that the negotiation for peace was going on, and that
additional Ministers and Envoys had gone to attend; that the combined fleets
were all in port; that the siege of Gibraltar was continued; and that there had
been an obstinate engagement in the East- Indies, between the French and
English fleets, in which both fleets had suffered much, but no ships were taken
by either side. The insurrection in South-America had been quelled.

15th. -- A new contract, for supplying the army with provisions, under Messrs.
Wadsworth and Carter, took place.

16th. -- A grand maneuver was performed by eight picked battalions,
preparatory to a grand review, which was to be the next day.

On the 19th (several preceding days having been stormy) the grand maneuver
was performed, by the eight picked battalions. The evolutions and firings were
performed with regularity and exactness, much to the credit of the troops, and
general satisfaction of the numerous spectators of the American and French
armies.

20th. -- The Secretary at War arrived at camp. The enemy were demolishing
their works at No. 8, Morrissania. Intelligence was received, that the
besiegers of Gibraltar had made a nearer approach to the place, and were
playing upon it with 200 pieces of artillery.

22d. -- The first division of the French army moved eastward; they were to
halt at Hartford, in Connecticut, where the whole were to rendezvous. The
American army was put under orders, to be ready to move on the shortest notice.
The August packet, from England, arrived at New York the day before.

24th. -- The whole American army maneuvered before the Hon. the Secretary at
War. The Commander in Chief, in the orders of the day, expressed his own, as
well as the Secretary at War's fullest approbation.

26th. -- At reveile, the left wing of the American army, under the command of
our General, struck their tents, and marched from the encampment, as far as the
wood, near the north redoubt, in the Highlands, where they remained during the
night; the day and night were rainy, and the troops had no covering but the
heavens.

27th. -- The troops crossed the Hudson in boats to West-Point, the whole
having crossed by half past 12 o'clock. In the afternoon, the troops took up
their line of march, and ascended Butter-Hill, a tedious march, and halted and
passed the night on the northern descent of the hill, in the open field.

28th. -- At 7 o'clock, A. M. the troops resumed their march from Butter-Hill,
and reached the ground on which they were to build their huts, in New-Windsor,
at about half past 10 o'clock, A. M. Upon this ground, and its vicinity, the
army passed the ensuing winter. The cantonment, for its nature and kind, was
regular and beautiful. Upon an eminence, the troops erected a building,
handsomely finished, with a spacious hall, sufficient to contain a brigade of
troops on Lord's days, for public worship, with an orchestra at one end; the
vault of the hall was arched; at each end of the hall were two rooms,
conveniently situated for the issuing of the general orders, for the sitting of
Boards of Officers, Courts Martial, etc. and an office and store for the
Quartermaster and Commissary's departments. On the top was a cupola and
flag-staff, on which a flag was hoisted occasionally, for signals, etc. In this
cantonment the army spent the winter very comfortably, and it proved to be
their last winter quarters.

30th. -- It was learnt, that on the 26th or 27th, fourteen British men-of-war,
of the line, one 44 gun ship, seven frigates, three large transports, and ten
or twelve brigs and schooners, failed from New York, it was conjectured for the
West Indies. They were observed to sail nearer under Long Island than usual,
and came too, near the place where Genesis How landed in the year 1776, where it
was conjectured troops now embarked.

On the 7th of the preceding August, Congress passed resolutions, directing the
Secretary at War, on or before the 1st day of January following, to cause the
non-commissioned officers and privates, belonging to the lines of the several
States, to be arranged in such manner as to form complete regiments, agreeable
to the acts of Congress of the 3d and 21st of October, 1780, of regiments of
not less than 500 rank and file, the junior regiments to be drafted to fill the
senior regiments. The regiments so formed, to be completely officered; the
officers to agree and determine who should stay in service; or if this could
not be effected by agreement, the juniors who were supernumerary of each grade
were to retire, retaining their rank, and be entitled to the emoluments, to
which the officers were entitled, who retired under the resolutions of the 3d
and 21st of October, 1780. In consequence of these resolutions, the Commander
in Chief, on this day, (30th of Oct.) ordered the regiments of the
Massachusetts line to be reduced to 8 regiments, of 500 rank and file each, or
as near as could be to that number; and the Connecticut line to 3 regiments of
similar strength, with 3 Field Officers, 9 Captains, 19 Subalterns, 1 Surgeon,
and 1 Mate each; and the regiments were formed accordingly.

November 1st. -- It was learnt from Europe, that the Royal George, a first
rate English man-of-war, of 110 guns, had been overset near Spithead, by a
sudden flaw of wind, as she lay heeled to repair a leak on the other side; that
she sunk in about 8 minutes, having on board 12 or 1300 souls, about 900 of
whom perished.

5th. -- Our General left the army, and commenced his journey to the eastward,
and arrived at his house in Roxbury on the 11th.

12th. -- There was a transit of Mercury over the north-west limb of the sun's
disk. The preceding week, one of the French men-of-war, in Portsmouth harbor,
(N. H.) was struck by lightning, and her foremast damaged. The French army were
now on their march toward Boston.

The America, a fine new 74 gun ship, the first of her rate built in the United
States, and which had not long before been presented by Congress to his most
Christian Majesty, was launched at Portsmouth on Tuesday the 5th instant.

18th. -- The field artillery of the French army reached Boston. The same day
it was reported, that the British troops had left Charleston, South Carolina.

21st. -- The French discharged their artillery horses, to the number of
several hundreds.

27th. -- Intelligence was received from Spain, that the British had relieved
Gibraltar, and taken a Spanish 70 gun ship; several of their gun-boats were
also destroyed. Had Spain long before this given over the siege of Gibraltar,
and employed her naval and land forces against the British in some quarter more
vulnerable, solid advantages might have accrued, much money and many lives have
been saved.

28th. -- General Thanksgiving throughout the United States. The French fleet,
under the command of the Marquis de Vaudreuil, was at this time in Nantasket
Road, except a few ships which were at Portsmouth, New Hampshire.

December 2d. -- Maj. Genesis Baron Viominel, commander of the French army, (Count
de Rochambeau not coming this way) arrived at Boston from Providence. The
troops were coming forward in divisions, at one day's march distance from each
other. The first division arrived at Boston on the 5th, in the morning.

6th. -- In the morning, a ship lying in Boston harbor, laden with masts,
destined to the West Indies, by some accident took fire, and burnt down to the
water's edge; the loss was very considerable. Advice was received from Europe,
that the Commissioners, for settling peace, were sitting at Paris; that matters
were in forwardness; several articles had been agreed to, etc. A reinforcement
of French ships and troops had arrived in the West Indies from France. This day
the last division of the French troops reached Boston. These troops embarked on
board the men-of-war, were much crowded, and in danger of growing sickly, if
continued long on board. About this time, the American officers had been very
uneasy respecting their great arrears of pay, etc.; and soon after addressed
Congress on the subject, and appointed a Committee from the army to present
their petition and support it.

11th. -- The town of Boston presented an address to the French General and
officers.

22d. -- The French fleet had all fallen down below the Castle, and were in
readiness to proceed to sea. The markets were at this time extremely high;
flour at 8 and some at 9 dollars per hundred; butter was sold at 2s. 4d. per
pound, etc.

24th. -- His most Christian Majesty's fleet, under the command of the Marquis
de Vaudreuil, came to sail in King and Nantasket Roads, and went out to sea,
having the army under the command of Genesis Viominel on board. The fleet was
first to stand to the northward, until it was joined by the ships from
Portsmouth; they were then to tack and stand to the southward, and take with
them the Fantasque, armed en-flute from Rhode Island, and proceed to the
West Indies.

25th. -- It was learnt, that near 3,000 refugee inhabitants had gone from
Charleston, South Carolina, to Jamaica, and about the same number to Augustine.
The exorbitant prices of provisions fell immediately after the sailing of the
French fleet.

26th. -- Authentic accounts were received from Europe, that Monsieur de la
Perreuse, in the ship Scepter, with two frigates, had returned to France, from
a successful enterprise against the British settlements in Hudson's Bay, having
entirely destroyed the establishments and property of the English on that
coast, estimating the damage at ten millions of livres.

31st. -- Intelligence was received, that the British homeward-bound West India
fleet, on their way to England, met a violent storm, in which two 74 gun ships,
the Ramillies and the Centaur, were said to have foundered; and that a number
of the merchantmen had been taken by French and American cruizers, and carried
into France -- that four prizes had been taken by the American frigate
Alliance, Capt. Barry, having 1,200 hhds. of sugar, and 400 hhds. of rum on
board.

1783. January 1st. -- Intelligence was received, that a terrible fire happened
in the city of Constantinople, in the month of the preceding August, in which a
large part of the city was consumed, and about 5,000 lives lost. The fire was
supposed to have been kindled by the malefactors, in six different places.

4th. -- Intelligence was received, that Great Britain had acknowledged the
Independence of the United States, collectively and severally; and that a
commission had been sent to Mr. Oswald, one of the British Commissioners at
Paris, to treat with the American Commissioners accordingly.

Some further accounts of the terrible fire in Constantinople, stated that near
200,000 inhabitants were burnt out of their habitations -- that the fire
continued to burn sixty-two hours, and at some times with a front a mile in
width.

8th. -- Intelligence was received, that the Charleston man-of-war, belonging
to the State of South Carolina, a remarkable fine ship, commanded by Commodore
Gillon, was taken by the British, and carried into New York.

In this month, the inhabitants of Massachusetts, in their several religious
societies, made voluntary contributions to the inhabitants of the town of
Charlestown, to enable them to rebuild a meetinghouse, in the room of that
which was destroyed by fire, by the British troops, during the battle of
Bunker's Hill, on the 17th of June, 1775.

24th. -- News was received, that Maj. Genesis Lord Sterling had lately died at
Albany; he was a brave officer in the American army.

25th. -- Intelligence was received, that the British troops left Charleston,
in South Carolina, the 14th of the preceding December, and the Bar the 17th;
and that Genesis Green had taken possession of the city. It had been previously
agreed, that the Americans would not molest the British in quitting the place;
and on their part, they were not to injure the city.

28th. -- It was learnt, that Genesis Clarke had been very successful against the
Shawanese Indians, and had destroyed a number of their towns. From Europe it
was learnt, that although there was the greatest prospect of peace, yet all the
powers at war were straining every nerve to be prepared for the opening of the
next campaign. The damage sustained by the British homeward bound West India
fleet, was greater than at first supposed; among the disabled ships was the
Ville de Paris, of 110 guns, and several others.

29th. -- A prize ship, taken by Capt. Manly, arrived in Boston harbor, having
about 1,800 barrels of provisions on board.

February 5th. -- News was received, that the British had reinforced the
garrison at Penobscot -- that the whole garrison consisted of nearly 900 men --
that a further reinforcement was expected -- and that the British were
endeavoring to extend their influence in that quarter.

6th. -- Intelligence was received, that a number of loyalists had gone from
New York to Nova Scotia; that Gov. Franklin, in England, had written to his
friends in New York, that peace would certainly take place. About this time,
the articles of a treaty of amity and commerce, between the United States of
America and Holland, was published by Congress. In the month of the preceding
December, Congress passed a spirited resolution, respecting the conduct of the
government of Vermont; and about this time, the Council of Vermont presented to
Congress a remonstrance against the resolution, as interfering with their
internal police.

About this time, Genesis Washington and Genesis Sir Guy Carleton had an interview on
the lines of the two armies.

20th. -- Intelligence was received, that Don Solano, with ten sail of Spanish
men-of-war, had arrived at the Havannah, and that the Count D'Estaing had
arrived, with a French fleet, at Martinico; that an attack on the island of
Jamaica was soon expected to take place; in consequence of which, seven British
regiments were to go from New York to the West Indies. The refugees at New York
were selling off their effects at auction, and preparing for a sudden removal
to Nova Scotia.

21st. -- The British King's speech, to his Parliament, appeared in a
hand-bill. The speech breathed reconciliation throughout. The King informed his
Parliament, that he had gone the utmost lengths the power granted to him would
allow; and that he hoped soon to lay before them the articles of peace, which
were in great forwardness, and such as he apprehended they would approve. That
he hoped the two countries would still be in friendship, -- that religion,
language, interest, etc. urged this, -- that he devoutly prayed Great Britain
might not experience any of those calamities, which might be feared from such a
dismemberment of the Empire; and then extends some compassionate expressions to
America. Alas, O King! it might have been happy for both countries, if a due
consideration had been early exercised; then might much blood and much treasure
have been saved. Let it be a warning to other nations, to be wise and just!
Nature will have her own way, and do her own work in her own time. America of
course would be independent and sovereign; but a mistaken policy in
Great Britain, hurried on an event to her own loss, long before nature had
ripened it for her own consummation. The public expectation now was high, and
the period when peace should be announced supposed to be even at the door, and
diverse premature accounts were at different times circulated.

25th. -- It was learnt, that Lieut. Col. Barber, of the New Jersey line, had a
little before been killed, together with his horse, near the army, by the
unexpected fall of a tree, which a soldier was cutting. By this event a brave
officer and valuable citizen was lost, who had frequently distinguished himself
in action; his fall, therefore, in this manner, and at the very grasp of the
harvest of his toils, were rendered the more affecting.

27th. -- Intelligence was received from Virginia, that the House of Delegates
of that State had recommended to their constituents, not to choose into places
of power and trust, men who had not been attached to the cause of liberty, and
only such as had given early and decided proof of their friendship.

28th. -- It was found, that the British cruizers, from New York, had lately
taken a number of American vessels, among them several from Boston to Virginia.

March 3d. -- Accounts were received from Europe, that in an assault made by
the Spanish troops on the garrison of Gibraltar, in the month of September, the
besieged, with their cannon loaded with grape-shot, made great havoc among the
assailants, but that this did not check their ardor; but that upon a near
approach to the walls, they were stopped, and thrown into great confusion by
several engines, throwing scalding water upon them. Some were scalded almost to
death, and others had their eyes put out -- a new mode of defense, but a
powerful one.

6th. -- Intelligence was received, that not long before, the French frigate
Sibill had been taken by some of the British cruizers, and carried into
New York.

20th. -- It was learnt from Philadelphia, that the Washington packet, Capt.
Barney, had arrived at that place from L'Orient in France, which place she left
the 17th of January. The public dispatches brought by this vessel, although
they did not announce a peace to be concluded, yet informed that the
negociations were going on; every thing was settled between America and
Great Britain, and matters looked favorable toward France; but difficulties
were subsisting between Great Britain, Spain and Holland. Several of the
out-lines of the articles of the treaty, between Great Britain and the United
States of America, were published, and in general were thought to be favorable
to the latter. The same packet brought dispatches for Genesis Sir Guy Carleton and
Admiral Digby, which were forwarded to New York.

22d. -- It was learnt, that a great uneasiness had discovered itself in the
American army, on account of the great arrears of pay which was due, and some
doubting apprehensions as to the real intention of the public to fulfill their
promises to the army, and in particular that of half pay. An anonymous
notification, and two addresses to the officers, made their appearance about
ten days before, couched in very firm and decided language; these produced an
address from the Commander in Chief, a meeting of the officers, a
representation to Congress, and their resolutions respecting the army at that
time.

The evening of the 28th, a letter was received from Philadelphia, purporting
that a vessel had arrived there from Europe, with the intelligence, that the
preliminary articles of peace were signed on the 20th of the preceding January.
Hostilities were to cease in Europe the 20th of February, and in America on the
20th of this month. The public dispatches had not now arrived, but were
momently expected.

April 2d. -- It was learnt, that a very valuable prize was carried into Salem.

7th. -- Our General sat out from his house in Roxbury, and arrived at the
headquarters of the American army at Newburgh, on Hudson's River, on the 14th,
in the forenoon.

On the 16th, in the general orders of the day, our General was directed to
take the immediate command of the army, during the absence of Maj. Genesis Gates.
Congress had published their proclamation suspending hostilities.

18th. -- The Commander in Chief addressed the army on the happy cessation of
hostilities as follows:

The Commander in Chief orders the cessation of hostilities between the United
States of America and the King of Great Britain, to be publicly proclaimed
tomorrow at 12 o'clock, at the New Building; and that the Proclamation which
will be communicated herewith, be read tomorrow evening, at the head of every
regiment and corpse of the army; after which, the chaplains, with the several
brigades, will render thanks to Almighty God for all his mercies, particularly
for his overruling the wrath of man to his own glory, and causing the rage of
war to cease amongst the nations.

Although the Proclamation before alluded to, extends only to the prohibition
of hostilities, and not to the annunciation of a general peace, yet it must
afford the most rational and sincere satisfaction to every benevolent mind, as
it puts a period to a long and doubtful contest -- stops the effusion of human
blood -- opens the prospect to a more splendid scene -- and, like another
morning star, promises the approach of a brighter day than has hitherto
illuminated this western hemisphere! On such a happy day -- a day which is the
harbinger of peace -- a day which completes the eighth year of the war, it
would be ingratitude not to rejoice: it would be insensibility not to
participate in the general felicity.

The Commander in Chief, far from endeavoring to stifle the feelings of joy in
his own bosom, offers his most cordial congratulations on the occasion, to all
the officers of every denomination -- to all the troops of the United States in
general, and in particular to those gallant and persevering men who had
resolved to defend the rights of their invaded country so long as the war
should continue; for these are the men who ought to be considered as the pride
and boast of the American army, and who, crowned with well-earned laurels, may
soon withdraw from the field of glory to the more tranquil walks of civil life.

While the General recollects the almost infinite variety of scenes through
which we have passed with a mixture of pleasure, astonishment and gratitude --
while he contemplates the prospects before us with rapture, -- he cannot help
wishing that all the brave men, of whatever condition they may be, who have
shared in the toils and dangers of effecting this glorious revolution, of
rescuing millions from the hand of oppression, and of laying the foundation of
a great empire, might be impressed with a proper idea of the dignified part
they have been called to act (under the smiles of Providence) on the stage of
human affairs; for happy, thrice happy, shall they be pronounced hereafter, who
have contributed any thing, who have performed the meanest office in erecting
this stupendous fabric of Freedom and Empire, on the broad basis of
independency; who have assisted in protecting the rights of human nature, and
establishing an asylum for the poor and oppressed of all nations and religions.

The glorious task for which we first flew to arms, being thus accomplished --
the liberties of our country being fully acknowledged and firmly secured, by
the smiles of Heaven on the purity of our cause, and the honest exertions of a
feeble people, determined to be free, against a powerful nation disposed to
oppress them; and the character of those who have persevered through every
extremity of hardship, suffering, and danger, being immortalized by the
illustrious appellation of the Patriot Army, -- nothing now remains but for the
actors of this mighty scene to preserve a perfect, unvarying consistency of
character through the very last act; to close the drama with applause; and to
retire from the military theater with the same approbation of angels and men,
which have crowned all their former virtuous actions.

For this purpose, no disorder or licentiousness must be tolerated; every
considerate and well-disposed soldier must remember it will be absolutely
necessary to wait with patience, until peace shall be declared, or Congress
shall be enabled to take proper measures for the security of the public stores,
etc. As soon as these arrangements shall be made, the General is confident
there will be no delay in discharging, with every mark of distinction and
honor, all the men enlisted for the war, who will then have faithfully
performed their engagements with the public. The General has already interested
himself in their behalf; and he thinks he need not repeat the assurances of his
disposition to be useful to them on the present, and every other proper
occasion. In the mean time, he is determined that no military neglects or
excesses shall go unpunished, while he retains the command of the army.

The Adjutant-General will have such workingparties detailed to assist in
making the preparation for a general rejoicing, as the Chief Engineer, with the
army, shall call for; and the Quarter-Master-General will also furnish such
materials as he may want. The Quarter-Master-General will, without delay,
procure such a number of discharges to be printed as will be sufficient for all
the men enlisted for the war; he will please to apply to headquarters for the
form.

An extra ration of liquor to be issued to every man tomorrow, to drink
perpetual peace, independence, and happiness to the United States of America.

In the afternoon of the 18th, a schooner, -- Cottle, master, from Nantucket,
with fish, oil, rum, etc. came up the Hudson, to Newburgh. This was the first
American vessel which had come up the river, since the British took possession
of New York, in the year 1776.

19th. -- At noon, the Proclamation of the Congress, for a cessation of
hostilities, was published at the door of the New Building, followed by three
huzzas; after which, a prayer was made by the Rev. Mr. Ganno, and an anthem
(Independence, from Billings) was performed by vocal and instrumental music.
The same day, Genesis Washington went for Ringwood, to meet the Secretary at War,
on some business of importance.

20th. -- At evening, the Commander in Chief returned to headquarters.

21st. -- Permission was given for such persons as might choose it, to go to
New York, with provisions, etc. A vessel was loading with flour, to go down the
river; and one laden with rum, porter, cheese, beef, etc. etc. came up from
New York. Thus, as we have seen how the rage of war came on, we now see how by
degrees that rage subsided, until the olive sprang up and progressed to full
bloom.

24th. -- It was learnt from Europe, that on the 5th of February, preceding the
Bedford, Capt. Morris, made entry at the custom-house in London, being the
first vessel that had arrived in the river, belonging to the United States.

26th. -- It was learnt that the refugees were embarking, in order to leave
New York; and many transports were falling down to the watering-place. About
this time, Congress recommended an impost duty to the several States.

27th. -- Intelligence was received, that the Indians had recently committed
some outrages on the western frontier; had killed and scalped 17 persons near
Wheeling Creek.

May 1st. -- Congress had expressed their opinion in a resolution which was
this day published, that the term for which the men engaged for the war, are to
serve, does not expire until the definitive treaty is received; and that then,
those engaged for the war, and who so continue, shall have their arms and
accoutrements, as a present, for their long and faithful services.

2d. -- The next morning, the Commander in Chief was to go down the river, to
Dobb's Ferry, to meet Genesis Sir Guy Carleton. Four companies of lightinfantry
marched this morning for that place, to do the duty of guards. Sir Guy was to
come up the river in a frigate.

3d. -- In the forenoon, the Commander in Chief, and Gov. Clinton, with their
suites, etc. went down the river.

7th. -- It was learnt that several vessels had arrived at Boston, from Europe,
Halifax, etc. with merchandise; in consequence of which, the price of goods had
much fallen, and the inhabitants of the eastern States were fitting out a great
number of fishing vessels.

8th. -- It was said that 11,644 American prisoners had died, during the war,
in the prisons, and on board the prison-ships, at New York: a surprising
number, and evidences that if their treatment was not severe, they were too
much crowded, or not properly attended to, in other respects. Those who have
seen, know, and others can easily conceive, that where men are closely confined
in great numbers, in prifon-ships, or in gaols, that without frequent airing
and cleansing, the air in such places becomes putrid and poisonous, and
produces almost certain death. How much care then ought to be exercised by
every humane commander, in the appointment of provost officers, to be assured
that those whom they appoint are not only firm and resolute, (necessary
qualifications in such officers) but that they also are considerate and humane;
and that such commanders themselves take care to know, and if necessary,
correct any abuses which may exist. Such conduct toward the confined and
distressed, would add a laurel to the hero's brow, equal to the triumphs of
victory, and more lasting: for if the merciful man be merciful even to his
beast, how much more ought a great and brave man to feel for the unfortunate of
his own species!

9th. -- At evening, the Commander in Chief returned to headquarters, having
had an interview with Genesis Sir Guy Carleton.

15th. -- The Commander in Chief went for Poughkeepsie. A letter from Genesis Sir
Guy Carleton, to Gov. Clinton, had rendered an interview between the Governor
and the Commander in Chief necessary.

16th. -- At evening, the Commander in Chief returned to headquarters.

28th. -- The army about this time were badly supplied with provisions, and
much uneasiness was discovered, both by the officers and soldiers.

31st. -- It was learnt that Congress had passed a resolution, to furlough the
men engaged for the war. This mode appeared to be marked with policy in several
respects.

June 2d. -- The general orders of the day announced, that the men engaged for
the war, should be immediately surloughed, with a proportion of the officers.
They were to be discharged as soon as the definitive treaty arrived; they were
to be marched home in divisions. Those men that remained engaged for other
periods, were to be formed into complete corpse. The officers to agree who
should stay, and in cases where they could not agree, seniority was to decide.

3d. -- The Maryland battalion was put under orders to march to the southward.

5th. -- The Maryland battalion marched from the cantonment. The same day, the
general officers, and officers commanding regiments and corpse, in the
cantonment on Hudson's River, having, by their committee for that purpose
appointed, prepared an address to the Commander in Chief -- it was accordingly
presented, in the words following: --

SIR,
IT is difficult for us to express the regret we feel at being obliged again to
solicit your Excellency's attention and patronage. Next to the anguish which
the prospect of our own wretchedness excites in our breasts, is the pain which
arises from a knowledge of your anxiety on account of those men who have been
the sharers of your fortunes, and have had the honor of being your companions
through the various vicissitudes of the war. Nothing, therefore, but necessity,
could induce us to a representation which we know must give you concern.

Your Excellency has so intimate a knowledge of the condition of the army, as
to render a particular delineation unnecessary. As you have been a witness of
our sufferings during a war uncommon in its nature, and unparalleled in many
circumstances attending it; so you are now, Sir, no less a witness of the
unequal burden which has fallen upon us, from the want of that provision, to
which, from our assiduous and unremitting services, we conceive we are
entitled. Having recently expressed our sense of what was due to our distress;
having repeated to your Excellency the confidence we had, that our accounts
would be liquidated, the balances ascertained, and adequate funds provided for
payment, previous to our being dispersed or disbanded; having seen with
pleasure, the approbation which Congress gave our reliance, it is with a
mixture of astonishment and chagrin, that we view the late resolve of Congress,
by which the soldiers for the war, and a proportionate number of officers, are
to be furloughed without any one of those important objects being accomplished;
and, to complete the scene of woe, are to be compelled to leave the army
without the means of defraying the debts we have necessarily incurred in the
course of service, or even of gratifying those menials in the pittance which is
their due; much less to carry with us that support and comfort to our families,
of which, from our long military services, they have been deprived. No less
exposed then to the insults of the meanest followers of the army, than to the
arrests of the sheriff -- deprived of the ability to assist our families, and
without an evidence that any thing is due to us for our services, and
consequently without the least prospect of obtaining credit for even a
temporary subsistence, until we can get into business -- to what quarter can we
look? We take the liberty to say, Sir, only to your Excellency; and, from the
sincerity of our hearts, we do it no less from a persuasion of the efficiency
of your further efforts in our favor, than from the kind assurances you have
been pleased to give us of your support.

To your Excellency, then, we make our appeal, and in the most solemn manner,
from that abhorrence of oppression and injustice which first unsheathed our
swords; from the remembrance of the common dangers through which we have
passed; and from the recollection of those astonishing events, which have been
effected by our united efforts, -- permit us to solicit your further aid, and
to entreat that the order of the 2d instant, founded on the act of Congress of
the 26th of May last, may be suspended or varied in its operation, so far as
that no officer or soldier be obliged to receive a furlough until that
honorable body can be apprized of the wretched situation into which the army
must be plunged by a conformity to it; that your Excellency will endeavor to
prevail on Congress -- nay, that on the principles of common justice, you will
insist that neither officer nor soldier be compelled to leave the field until a
liquidation of accounts can be effected, till the balances are ascertained,
certificates for the sums due, given, including the commutation of half pay to
the officers, and gratuity of 80 dollars to the soldiers; and till a supply of
money can be furnished, sufficient to carry us from the field of glory with
honor to ourselves and credit to our country. We still wish to believe, that
that country to which we have been so long devoted, will never look with
indifference on the distresses of those of her sons who have so essentially
contributed to the establishment of Freedom, the security of property, and the
rearing of an empire.

In the name and behalf of the Generals and officers commanding regiments and
corpse, in the cantonment on Hudson's River,

I have the honor to be, With the highest respect, Your Excellency's Most
obedient servant, W. HEATH, Maj. Genesis President.
June 5th, 1783.

To the foregoing address, Genesis Washington was pleased to return the following
answer, viz.

HEADQUARTERS, June 6th, 1783. SIR,
BEFORE I make a reply to the subject of the address of the Generals and
Officers, commanding the regiments and corpse of this army, presented by
yourself, yesterday, I entreat that those gentlemen will accept my warmest
acknowledgment for the confidence they have been pleased to repose in me; they
may be assured it shall never be abused: and I beg they will be persuaded, that
as no man can possibly be better acquainted than I am, with the past merits and
services of the army, so no one can possibly be more strongly impressed with
their present ineligible situation, feel a keener sensibility at their
distresses, or more ardently desire to alleviate or remove them. But it would
be unnecessary, perhaps, to enter into a detail of what I have done, and what I
am still attempting to do, in order to assist in the accomplishment of this
interesting purpose. Let it be sufficient to observe, I do not yet despair of
success; for I am perfectly convinced that the States cannot, without involving
themselves in national bankruptcy and ruin, refuse to comply with the
requisitions of Congress; who, it must be acknowledged, have done every thing
in their power to obtain ample and complete justice for the army; and whose
great object in the present measure undoubtedly was, by a reduction of expense,
to enable the Financier to make the three months' payment to the army, which on
all hands has been agreed to be absolutely and indispensably necessary. To
explain this matter, I beg leave to insert an extract of a letter from the
Superintendant of Finance, dated the 29th ult.

It is now a month since the Committee conferred with me on that subject, and I
then told them no payment could be made to the army, but by means of a paper
anticipation; and unless our expenditures were immediately and considerably
reduced, even that could not be done. Our expenditures have nevertheless been
continued, and our revenues lessen, the States growing daily more and more
remiss in their collections. The consequence is, that I cannot make payment in
the manner first intended; the notes issued for this purpose would have been
payable at two, four, and six months from the date, but at present they will be
at six months, and even that will soon become impracticable, unless our
expenses be immediately curtailed.

I shall cause such notes to be issued for three months' pay to the army; and I
must entreat, Sir, that every influence be used with the States to absorb them,
together with my other engagements, by taxation.

Three days ago, a messenger was dispatched by me to urge the necessity of
forwarding these notes with the greatest possible expedition.

Under this state of circumstances, I need scarcely add, that the expense of
every day in feeding the whole army, will increase very considerably the
inability of the public to discharge the debts already incurred, at least for a
considerable time to come.

Although the officers of the army very well know my official situation, that I
am only a servant of the public, and that it is not for me to dispense with
orders, which it is my duty to carry into execution; yet, as furloughs, in all
services, are considered as a matter of indulgence and not of compulsion -- as
Congress, I am persuaded, entertain the best disposition toward the army --
and, as I apprehend, in a very short time the two principal articles of
complaint will be removed -- I shall not hesitate to comply with the wishes of
the army, under these reservations only, that officers sufficient to conduct
the men who choose to receive furloughs, will attend them, either on furlough
or by detachment. The propriety and necessity of this measure must be obvious
to all; it need not, therefore, be enforced; and with regard to the
non-commissioned officers and privates, such as from a peculiarity of
circumstances wish not to receive furloughs at this time, will give in their
names by 12 o'clock tomorrow, to the commanding officers of their regiments,
that on a report to the Adjutant-General, an equal number of men, engaged for
three years, may be furloughed, which will make the saving of expenses exactly
the same to the public.

I cannot but hope the notes will soon arrive, and that the settlement of
accounts may be completed, by the assistance of the Pay-Masters, in a very few
days. In the mean time, I shall have the honor of laying the sentiments of the
Generals and Officers, commanding regiments and corpse, before Congress; they
are expressed in such a decent, candid and affecting manner, that I am certain
every mark of attention will be paid to them.

I have the honor to be, With great esteem, Sir, Your most obedient Servant,
(Signed) GEO. WASHINGTON.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

The two preceding papers were enclosed in the following letter from the
Commander in Chief to his Excellency the President of Congress.

HEADQUARTERS, NEWBURGH, June 7, 1783. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to enclose to your Excellency the copy of an address to me,
from the Generals and Officers, commanding regiments and corpse, together with
my answer to it. These enclosures will explain the distresses which resulted
from the measures now carrying into execution, in consequence of the resolution
of the 26th of May; but the sensibility occasioned by a parting scene, under
such peculiar circumstances, will not admit of description!

The two subjects of complaint with the army, appear to be the delay of the
three months' payment which had been expected, and the want of a settlement of
accounts. I have thought myself authorized to assure them, Congress had and
would attend particularly to their grievances; and have made some little
variation respecting furloughs, from what was at first proposed; the Secretary
at War will be able to explain the reason and propriety of this alteration.

While I consider it a tribute of justice, on this occasion, to mention the
temperate and orderly behavior of the whole army, and particularly the
accommodating spirit of the officers, in arranging themselves to the command of
the battalions which will be composed of the three years' men; permit me to
recall to mind all their, former sufferings and merits, and to recommend their
reasonable requests to the early and favorable notice of Congress.

I have the honor to be, etc.


A little before this time, the officers of the army beginning to realize that
the dissolution of the army was drawing nigh, and wishing to perpetuate that
friendship which numerous hardships, sufferings, and common dangers had
inspired in their breasts, -- resolved to form themselves into a Society, by
the name of the Cincinnati. Several meetings were had for the purpose, and an
Institution was digested and completed; and although our General presided at
one of the meetings, and cheerfully, at the request of his brother officers,
transmitted copies of the Institution, covered by a letter, to the officer
commanding the southern army, and to the senior officers of the respective
State lines, from Pennsylvania to Georgia -- yet he had serious objections to
the Institution, as it stood, and refused for some time to sign it. He wished,
as much as any one in the army, to perpetuate the happy friendship cemented in
the breasts of the officers by an eight years common danger and sufferings; but
he thought this would be best done, by simply forming a Society, to meet
annually in their respective States, for the purpose of a social hour, and to
brighten the chain of friendship, with a fund for the relief of the unfortunate
of their brethren; but he was opposed to any idea of any thing that had any
resemblance of an order, or any insignia or badge of distinction, asserting
that it would only serve to mark them in an unfavourable light with their
fellow-citizens: but the prevailing opinion of the officers was otherwise. Our
General was finally induced to sign the Institution, from the following
consideration -- (but not until all the officers were appointed, and he nearly
ready to leave the army) conversing with an officer of rank, who was of the
same opinion with him, they parted in the resolution not to sign the
Institution; but the next morning, the officer called upon him, and observed,
that one consideration, not before mentioned, had occurred to him, viz. that it
might happen in the days of their posterity, in case they did not sign, that
the descendant of one who was a member might happen to fall in company with the
descendant of one who was not; that the latter, on observing the badge, might
inquire what it was, and what its intention? upon its being answered, that it
was the insignia of a Society, of which his ancestor, who served in the
American army, during the revolution, was a member -- the other might reply, my
ancestor too served during that war, but I never heard any thing of such a
badge in our family; to which it might probably be answered, it is likely your
ancestor was guilty of some misconduct, which deprived him of it. Upon this,
our General broke out -- "I see it, I see it, and spurn the idea;" which led
him to sign the general Institution: and he subscribed to the State fund, 166
dollars, being one month's pay, as was stipulated in the Institution. He
however never met with the Society, although no one has cherished a warmer
affection for every member of the army. After the revolution in France, finding
that the insignias of distinctions were doing away, it led him anew to review
the distinction which the badge of the Society to which he belonged, if not in
fact, yet in appearance seemed to exhibit, and brought to mind all his former
objections, which induced him to write to the Secretary-General to erase his
name from the Institution; but that his subscription to the fund should remain,
so long as it was applied to the purpose for which it was given -- the relief
of the unfortunate.

6th. -- In the forenoon, the Jersey line marched from the cantonment to their
own State, where they were to be disbanded. The same day, the first New York
regiment made a present of their standards and band to Governor Clinton; they
were escorted to Poughkeepsie by the light-infantry company of the regiment.

8th. -- The men for the war, belonging to the Maryland, New Jersey, New York,
and New Hampshire lines, having marched from the cantonment, a division of the
Massachusetts men marched on this day.

9th. -- A division of the Suffolk and Worcester furloughed men, marched for
their own State, and so on, a division each day, until the whole had marched.

10th. -- Our General was General of the Day. In the after orders of the
Commander in Chief on this day, it was expressed -- "The strength of the army
in this cantonment being considerably diminished by the number of men lately
furloughed, the order of the 16th of April, directing a General,
Field-Officers, and Quartermaster to be of the day, and also a regiment to
parade every day for duty, is dispensed with. For the present, there will be
one Field-Officer, and an Adjutant of the day; and the guards only will form on
the grand parade at 9 o'clock in the morning." It is here a little remarkable,
that our General, by whose orders and under whose direction the first guard in
the American war mounted at the foot of Prospect Hill, on the evening of the
19th of April, 1775, after the battle of that day, should happen, in the course
of service, to be the last General of the day in the American main army, on the
10th of June, 1783, to inspect, turn off, and visit the guards. At the first
period, the roads were full of militia, pressing toward Boston, to commence
and prosecute a dubious war; they were now filled with veteran soldiers,
covered with laurels, returning from the field to their peaceful abodes.

11th. -- About 2 o'clock, P. M. the wind freshened from the west; there were
several thunder-showers, with large hailstones, some of which were supposed to
be two inches long. The lightning struck the flag-staff of the New Building,
entered the house, and ran down the south side of it, doing some damage, and
stunning several soldiers near the door. In the general orders of this day, it
was announced, that the levees were to be discontinued.

13th. -- The men who had enlisted for 3 years, and for shorter periods not
expired, were formed, those belonging to Massachusetts into 4 regiments, and
were to be commanded by Colonels Michael Jackson, Henry Jackson, and Joseph
Vose, and Lieut. Col. Commandant Sprout. On the morning of the 16th, these
regiments incorporated, and were formed into two brigades, the one commanded by
Brig. Genesis Patterson, the other by Brig. Genesis Greaton.

19th. -- A number of officers of the army, viz. several general officers, and
officers commanding regiments and corpse, met at the New Building, and elected
his Excellency Genesis Washington, President General; Genesis M'Dougal, Treasurer;
and Genesis Knox, Secretary, pro tempore, to the Society of the Cincinnati.

20th. -- The Massachusetts State Society of the Cincinnati met, and made
choice of Maj. Genesis Lincoln for their President; Maj. Genesis Knox,
Vice President; Col. John Brooks, Secretary; Col. Henry Jackson, Treasurer; and
Capt. Heywood, Assistant-Treasurer. The same day, the troops at the cantonment
were put under orders, to be ready to march for West-Point on the succeeding
Monday.

22d. -- Our General issued his last order, which finished as follows: "The
long wished for period having arrived, when the din of war ceases, the
olivebranch of peace is displayed, the toils and fatigues of the field are
drawing to a close, a part of the army have already mingled with their
fellow-citizens, and others will probably ere long join them -- Maj. Genesis Heath
being about to leave the army, and this being the last opportunity which will
remain in his power, to express that affection for his brother officers and
soldiers, which more than eight years service has established in his breast, he
cannot depart without leaving his best wishes for the health, prosperity and
happiness of those, whose lot it is a little longer to continue in the field --
invoke every blessing on them, and bid them an affectionate farewell."

23d. -- The Massachusetts regiments marched to West-Point.

The morning of the 24th, our General was to commence his journey homeward; but
the Commander in Chief wished him not to proceed until the afternoon. On his
arrival at headquarters, Col-Humphries, one of the Aids-de-Camp of the
Commander in Chief, gave him a sealed letter, observing to him to read it at
his leisure. On opening it, in General Washington's own handwriting it was as
follows:

(Private.)
HEADQUARTERS, June 24th, 1783. DEAR SIR,
PREVIOUS to your departure from the army, I wish to take an opportunity of
expressing my sentiments of your services, my obligations for your assistance,
and my wishes for your future felicity.

Our object is at last attained; the arrangements are almost completed, and the
day of separation is now at hand. Permit me, therefore, to thank you for the
trouble you have lately taken in the arrangement of the corpse under your
orders, as well as for all your former cheerful and able exertions in the
public service. Suffer me to offer this last testimony of my regard to your
merits; and give me leave, my dear Sir, to assure you of the real affection and
esteem with which I am, and shall at all times, and under all circumstances,
continue to be

Your sincere friend, and Very humble servant, (Signed) G. WASHINGTON.

Maj. Genesis HEATH.

In the afternoon, the general officers were in Council at headquarters, in
consequence of an express from Philadelphia. Four or five hundred men of the
Pennsylvania line, of those who had been furloughed on or about the 20th, grew
very mutinous, refused to obey orders, entered the city of Philadelphia, seized
some public stores, surrounded the place where Congress and the Supreme Court
of the State were sitting, and made several demands, and occasioned some
consternation, which caused a representation to the Commander in Chief. The
continental regiments were to be put under marching orders immediately. It was
judged inexpedient to call out the militia.

At about 5 o'clock, P. M. our General took his leave of his beloved General,
and commenced his journey for Massachusetts, and arrived at his house in
Roxbury on the first day of July, at 2 o'clock, P. M. where he gave evidence
that an eight years military life had not divested him of the feelings or
manners of a citizen.

October 30th. -- It was learnt, that the definitive treaty of peace was signed
the 3d of the preceding September; and that dispatches were sent off to the
different Courts in Europe, to America, the East and West Indies, etc. with an
account of this happy event.

Congress, by a proclamation which bore date the 18th of this month, discharged
from further service such soldiers as were engaged for the war, and officers
who were absent by derangement and furlough. The discharges to take place the
3d of November, ensuing.

November 2d. -- Genesis Washington issued his last and farewell orders to the
federal armies, taking an affectionate leave of them, and giving them his best
advice.

4th. -- Genesis Washington, by proclamation, in compliance with a resolve of
Congress of the 29th of the preceding October, discharged all the troops in the
service of the United States, that were then in Pennsylvania, or to the
southward thereof, except the garrison of Fort Pit.

The British troops having left New York, on the 25th of November, at one
o'clock, P. M. a detachment of the American army took possession of the city;
after which, his Excellency General Washington, and Governor Clinton, made
their public entry, properly escorted, etc. The Governor gave a public dinner
at Frances' tavern.

December 2d. -- There was a grand exhibition of fireworks in celebration of
the peace, at the bowling-green, in Broadway. The magnificent fireworks far
exceeded any before exhibited in the United States.

On the 4th, at noon, a great number of American officers of distinction met at
Frances' tavern, to take their leave of their great Commander, Genesis Washington,
who, on filling a glass of wine, addressed his brave compatriots as follows: --

With an heart full of love and gratitude, I now take leave of you -- I most
devoutly wish that your latter days may be as prosperous and happy, as your
former ones have been glorious and honorable. The dissolution of the American
army (excepting a small detachment of artillery and of infantry) took place a
few days after; and General WASHINGTON, ere long, retired to his seat at Mount
Vernon, covered with every laurel with which his own victorious conduct, and a
grateful country, could adorn him; and with the applause of an admiring world.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 46, line 2, for Montresos read Montresors.

P. 54, last line, after below, place a semicolon.

P. 65, l. 18, for Lo! r. low, and place the inverted commas at "we.

Ibid, l. 4 from the bottom, for boats r. boat.

P. 67, l. 12 from the bottom, for ne^k r. creek.

P. 69, l. 14 from the bottom, after reserve place a comma.

P. 104, l. 8 and 9, for Erving r. Ewing.

P. 111, l. 10 from the bottom, for Delancy's r. Delancy's.

P. 199, l. 13 from the bottom, for Gambice r. Gambier.

P. 207, l. 14, for proceed r. proceeded.

P. 210, l. 5, for surrounded r. supported.

P. 244, l. 9, for Seville r. Leville.

Ibid, l. 10, for Fantasque r. Fantasque.

P. 276, l. 18, for Mecklenburgh r. Mublenburgh.

P. 298, l. 7 from the bottom, for minutes r. minutes.

P. 314, l. 3, for were r. where.


