part i  a voyage to lilliput


chapter i


the author gives some account of himself and family  his first
inducements to travel  he is shipwrecked and swims for his life  gets
safe on shore in the country of lilliput is made a prisoner and carried
up the country

my father had a small estate in nottinghamshire i was the third of five
sons  he sent me to emanuel college in cambridge at fourteen years old
where i resided three years and applied myself close to my studies but
the charge of maintaining me although i had a very scanty allowance
being too great for a narrow fortune i was bound apprentice to mr james
bates an eminent surgeon in london with whom i continued four years
my father now and then sending me small sums of money i laid them out in
learning navigation and other parts of the mathematics useful to those
who intend to travel as i always believed it would be some time or
other my fortune to do  when i left mr bates i went down to my
father where by the assistance of him and my uncle john and some other
relations i got forty pounds and a promise of thirty pounds a year to
maintain me at leyden there i studied physic two years and seven months
knowing it would be useful in long voyages

soon after my return from leyden i was recommended by my good master
mr bates to be surgeon to the swallow captain abraham pannel
commander with whom i continued three years and a half making a voyage
or two into the levant and some other parts  when i came back i
resolved to settle in london to which mr bates my master encouraged
me and by him i was recommended to several patients  i took part of a
small house in the old jewry and being advised to alter my condition i
married mrs mary burton second daughter to mr edmund burton hosier
in newgatestreet with whom i received four hundred pounds for a
portion

but my good master bates dying in two years after and i having few
friends my business began to fail for my conscience would not suffer me
to imitate the bad practice of too many among my brethren  having
therefore consulted with my wife and some of my acquaintance i
determined to go again to sea  i was surgeon successively in two ships
and made several voyages for six years to the east and west indies by
which i got some addition to my fortune  my hours of leisure i spent in
reading the best authors ancient and modern being always provided with
a good number of books and when i was ashore in observing the manners
and dispositions of the people as well as learning their language
wherein i had a great facility by the strength of my memory

the last of these voyages not proving very fortunate i grew weary of the
sea and intended to stay at home with my wife and family  i removed
from the old jewry to fetter lane and from thence to wapping hoping to
get business among the sailors but it would not turn to account  after
three years expectation that things would mend i accepted an
advantageous offer from captain william prichard master of the antelope
who was making a voyage to the south sea  we set sail from bristol may
4 1699 and our voyage was at first very prosperous

it would not be proper for some reasons to trouble the reader with the
particulars of our adventures in those seas let it suffice to inform
him that in our passage from thence to the east indies we were driven
by a violent storm to the northwest of van diemens land  by an
observation we found ourselves in the latitude of 30 degrees 2 minutes
south  twelve of our crew were dead by immoderate labour and ill food
the rest were in a very weak condition  on the 5th of november which
was the beginning of summer in those parts the weather being very hazy
the seamen spied a rock within half a cables length of the ship but the
wind was so strong that we were driven directly upon it and immediately
split  six of the crew of whom i was one having let down the boat into
the sea made a shift to get clear of the ship and the rock  we rowed
by my computation about three leagues till we were able to work no
longer being already spent with labour while we were in the ship  we
therefore trusted ourselves to the mercy of the waves and in about half
an hour the boat was overset by a sudden flurry from the north  what
became of my companions in the boat as well as of those who escaped on
the rock or were left in the vessel i cannot tell but conclude they
were all lost  for my own part i swam as fortune directed me and was
pushed forward by wind and tide  i often let my legs drop and could
feel no bottom but when i was almost gone and able to struggle no
longer i found myself within my depth and by this time the storm was
much abated  the declivity was so small that i walked near a mile
before i got to the shore which i conjectured was about eight oclock in
the evening  i then advanced forward near half a mile but could not
discover any sign of houses or inhabitants at least i was in so weak a
condition that i did not observe them  i was extremely tired and with
that and the heat of the weather and about half a pint of brandy that i
drank as i left the ship i found myself much inclined to sleep  i lay
down on the grass which was very short and soft where i slept sounder
than ever i remembered to have done in my life and as i reckoned about
nine hours for when i awaked it was just daylight  i attempted to
rise but was not able to stir for as i happened to lie on my back i
found my arms and legs were strongly fastened on each side to the ground
and my hair which was long and thick tied down in the same manner  i
likewise felt several slender ligatures across my body from my armpits
to my thighs  i could only look upwards the sun began to grow hot and
the light offended my eyes  i heard a confused noise about me but in
the posture i lay could see nothing except the sky  in a little time i
felt something alive moving on my left leg which advancing gently
forward over my breast came almost up to my chin when bending my eyes
downwards as much as i could i perceived it to be a human creature not
six inches high with a bow and arrow in his hands and a quiver at his
back  in the mean time i felt at least forty more of the same kind as
i conjectured following the first  i was in the utmost astonishment
and roared so loud that they all ran back in a fright and some of them
as i was afterwards told were hurt with the falls they got by leaping
from my sides upon the ground  however they soon returned and one of
them who ventured so far as to get a full sight of my face lifting up
his hands and eyes by way of admiration cried out in a shrill but
distinct voice hekinah degul the others repeated the same words
several times but then i knew not what they meant  i lay all this
while as the reader may believe in great uneasiness  at length
struggling to get loose i had the fortune to break the strings and
wrench out the pegs that fastened my left arm to the ground for by
lifting it up to my face i discovered the methods they had taken to bind
me and at the same time with a violent pull which gave me excessive
pain i a little loosened the strings that tied down my hair on the left
side so that i was just able to turn my head about two inches  but the
creatures ran off a second time before i could seize them whereupon
there was a great shout in a very shrill accent and after it ceased i
heard one of them cry aloud tolgo phonac when in an instant i felt
above a hundred arrows discharged on my left hand which pricked me like
so many needles and besides they shot another flight into the air as
we do bombs in europe whereof many i suppose fell on my body though
i felt them not and some on my face which i immediately covered with
my left hand  when this shower of arrows was over i fell a groaning
with grief and pain and then striving again to get loose they
discharged another volley larger than the first and some of them
attempted with spears to stick me in the sides but by good luck i had on
a buff jerkin which they could not pierce  i thought it the most
prudent method to lie still and my design was to continue so till night
when my left hand being already loose i could easily free myself and
as for the inhabitants i had reason to believe i might be a match for
the greatest army they could bring against me if they were all of the
same size with him that i saw  but fortune disposed otherwise of me
when the people observed i was quiet they discharged no more arrows
but by the noise i heard i knew their numbers increased and about four
yards from me over against my right ear i heard a knocking for above an
hour like that of people at work when turning my head that way as well
as the pegs and strings would permit me i saw a stage erected about a
foot and a half from the ground capable of holding four of the
inhabitants with two or three ladders to mount it from whence one of
them who seemed to be a person of quality made me a long speech
whereof i understood not one syllable  but i should have mentioned that
before the principal person began his oration he cried out three times
langro dehul san these words and the former were afterwards repeated
and explained to me whereupon immediately about fifty of the
inhabitants came and cut the strings that fastened the left side of my
head which gave me the liberty of turning it to the right and of
observing the person and gesture of him that was to speak  he appeared
to be of a middle age and taller than any of the other three who
attended him whereof one was a page that held up his train and seemed
to be somewhat longer than my middle finger the other two stood one on
each side to support him  he acted every part of an orator and i could
observe many periods of threatenings and others of promises pity and
kindness  i answered in a few words but in the most submissive manner
lifting up my left hand and both my eyes to the sun as calling him for
a witness and being almost famished with hunger having not eaten a
morsel for some hours before i left the ship i found the demands of
nature so strong upon me that i could not forbear showing my impatience
perhaps against the strict rules of decency by putting my finger
frequently to my mouth to signify that i wanted food  the hurgo for
so they call a great lord as i afterwards learnt understood me very
well  he descended from the stage and commanded that several ladders
should be applied to my sides on which above a hundred of the
inhabitants mounted and walked towards my mouth laden with baskets full
of meat which had been provided and sent thither by the kings orders
upon the first intelligence he received of me  i observed there was the
flesh of several animals but could not distinguish them by the taste
there were shoulders legs and loins shaped like those of mutton and
very well dressed but smaller than the wings of a lark  i ate them by
two or three at a mouthful and took three loaves at a time about the
bigness of musket bullets  they supplied me as fast as they could
showing a thousand marks of wonder and astonishment at my bulk and
appetite  i then made another sign that i wanted drink  they found by
my eating that a small quantity would not suffice me and being a most
ingenious people they slung up with great dexterity one of their
largest hogsheads then rolled it towards my hand and beat out the top
i drank it off at a draught which i might well do for it did not hold
half a pint and tasted like a small wine of burgundy but much more
delicious  they brought me a second hogshead which i drank in the same
manner and made signs for more but they had none to give me  when i
had performed these wonders they shouted for joy and danced upon my
breast repeating several times as they did at first hekinah degul
they made me a sign that i should throw down the two hogsheads but first
warning the people below to stand out of the way crying aloud borach
mevolah and when they saw the vessels in the air there was a universal
shout of hekinah degul  i confess i was often tempted while they were
passing backwards and forwards on my body to seize forty or fifty of the
first that came in my reach and dash them against the ground  but the
remembrance of what i had felt which probably might not be the worst
they could do and the promise of honour i made them—for so i interpreted
my submissive behaviour—soon drove out these imaginations  besides i
now considered myself as bound by the laws of hospitality to a people
who had treated me with so much expense and magnificence  however in my
thoughts i could not sufficiently wonder at the intrepidity of these
diminutive mortals who durst venture to mount and walk upon my body
while one of my hands was at liberty without trembling at the very sight
of so prodigious a creature as i must appear to them  after some time
when they observed that i made no more demands for meat there appeared
before me a person of high rank from his imperial majesty  his
excellency having mounted on the small of my right leg advanced
forwards up to my face with about a dozen of his retinue and producing
his credentials under the signet royal which he applied close to my
eyes spoke about ten minutes without any signs of anger but with a kind
of determinate resolution often pointing forwards which as i
afterwards found was towards the capital city about half a mile
distant whither it was agreed by his majesty in council that i must be
conveyed  i answered in few words but to no purpose and made a sign
with my hand that was loose putting it to the other but over his
excellencys head for fear of hurting him or his train and then to my
own head and body to signify that i desired my liberty  it appeared
that he understood me well enough for he shook his head by way of
disapprobation and held his hand in a posture to show that i must be
carried as a prisoner  however he made other signs to let me understand
that i should have meat and drink enough and very good treatment
whereupon i once more thought of attempting to break my bonds but again
when i felt the smart of their arrows upon my face and hands which were
all in blisters and many of the darts still sticking in them and
observing likewise that the number of my enemies increased i gave tokens
to let them know that they might do with me what they pleased  upon
this the hurgo and his train withdrew with much civility and cheerful
countenances  soon after i heard a general shout with frequent
repetitions of the words peplom selan and i felt great numbers of
people on my left side relaxing the cords to such a degree that i was
able to turn upon my right and to ease myself with making water which i
very plentifully did to the great astonishment of the people who
conjecturing by my motion what i was going to do immediately opened to
the right and left on that side to avoid the torrent which fell with
such noise and violence from me  but before this they had daubed my
face and both my hands with a sort of ointment very pleasant to the
smell which in a few minutes removed all the smart of their arrows
these circumstances added to the refreshment i had received by their
victuals and drink which were very nourishing disposed me to sleep  i
slept about eight hours as i was afterwards assured and it was no
wonder for the physicians by the emperors order had mingled a sleepy
potion in the hogsheads of wine

it seems that upon the first moment i was discovered sleeping on the
ground after my landing the emperor had early notice of it by an
express and determined in council that i should be tied in the manner i
have related which was done in the night while i slept that plenty of
meat and drink should be sent to me and a machine prepared to carry me
to the capital city

this resolution perhaps may appear very bold and dangerous and i am
confident would not be imitated by any prince in europe on the like
occasion  however in my opinion it was extremely prudent as well as
generous for supposing these people had endeavoured to kill me with
their spears and arrows while i was asleep i should certainly have
awaked with the first sense of smart which might so far have roused my
rage and strength as to have enabled me to break the strings wherewith i
was tied after which as they were not able to make resistance so they
could expect no mercy

these people are most excellent mathematicians and arrived to a great
perfection in mechanics by the countenance and encouragement of the
emperor who is a renowned patron of learning  this prince has several
machines fixed on wheels for the carriage of trees and other great
weights  he often builds his largest men of war whereof some are nine
feet long in the woods where the timber grows and has them carried on
these engines three or four hundred yards to the sea  five hundred
carpenters and engineers were immediately set at work to prepare the
greatest engine they had  it was a frame of wood raised three inches
from the ground about seven feet long and four wide moving upon
twentytwo wheels  the shout i heard was upon the arrival of this
engine which it seems set out in four hours after my landing  it was
brought parallel to me as i lay  but the principal difficulty was to
raise and place me in this vehicle  eighty poles each of one foot high
were erected for this purpose and very strong cords of the bigness of
packthread were fastened by hooks to many bandages which the workmen
had girt round my neck my hands my body and my legs  nine hundred of
the strongest men were employed to draw up these cords by many pulleys
fastened on the poles and thus in less than three hours i was raised
and slung into the engine and there tied fast  all this i was told
for while the operation was performing i lay in a profound sleep by
the force of that soporiferous medicine infused into my liquor  fifteen
hundred of the emperors largest horses each about four inches and a
half high were employed to draw me towards the metropolis which as i
said was half a mile distant

about four hours after we began our journey i awaked by a very
ridiculous accident for the carriage being stopped a while to adjust
something that was out of order two or three of the young natives had
the curiosity to see how i looked when i was asleep they climbed up into
the engine and advancing very softly to my face one of them an officer
in the guards put the sharp end of his halfpike a good way up into my
left nostril which tickled my nose like a straw and made me sneeze
violently whereupon they stole off unperceived and it was three weeks
before i knew the cause of my waking so suddenly  we made a long march
the remaining part of the day and rested at night with five hundred
guards on each side of me half with torches and half with bows and
arrows ready to shoot me if i should offer to stir  the next morning at
sunrise we continued our march and arrived within two hundred yards of
the city gates about noon  the emperor and all his court came out to
meet us but his great officers would by no means suffer his majesty to
endanger his person by mounting on my body

at the place where the carriage stopped there stood an ancient temple
esteemed to be the largest in the whole kingdom which having been
polluted some years before by an unnatural murder was according to the
zeal of those people looked upon as profane and therefore had been
applied to common use and all the ornaments and furniture carried away
in this edifice it was determined i should lodge  the great gate
fronting to the north was about four feet high and almost two feet wide
through which i could easily creep  on each side of the gate was a small
window not above six inches from the ground into that on the left side
the kings smith conveyed fourscore and eleven chains like those that
hang to a ladys watch in europe and almost as large which were locked
to my left leg with sixandthirty padlocks  over against this temple
on the other side of the great highway at twenty feet distance there
was a turret at least five feet high  here the emperor ascended with
many principal lords of his court to have an opportunity of viewing me
as i was told for i could not see them  it was reckoned that above a
hundred thousand inhabitants came out of the town upon the same errand
and in spite of my guards i believe there could not be fewer than ten
thousand at several times who mounted my body by the help of ladders
but a proclamation was soon issued to forbid it upon pain of death
when the workmen found it was impossible for me to break loose they cut
all the strings that bound me whereupon i rose up with as melancholy a
disposition as ever i had in my life  but the noise and astonishment of
the people at seeing me rise and walk are not to be expressed  the
chains that held my left leg were about two yards long and gave me not
only the liberty of walking backwards and forwards in a semicircle but
being fixed within four inches of the gate allowed me to creep in and
lie at my full length in the temple



chapter ii


the emperor of lilliput attended by several of the nobility comes to
see the author in his confinement  the emperors person and habit
described  learned men appointed to teach the author their language  he
gains favour by his mild disposition  his pockets are searched and his
sword and pistols taken from him

when i found myself on my feet i looked about me and must confess i
never beheld a more entertaining prospect  the country around appeared
like a continued garden and the enclosed fields which were generally
forty feet square resembled so many beds of flowers  these fields were
intermingled with woods of half a stang 301 and the tallest trees as
i could judge appeared to be seven feet high  i viewed the town on my
left hand which looked like the painted scene of a city in a theatre

i had been for some hours extremely pressed by the necessities of nature
which was no wonder it being almost two days since i had last
disburdened myself  i was under great difficulties between urgency and
shame  the best expedient i could think of was to creep into my house
which i accordingly did and shutting the gate after me i went as far as
the length of my chain would suffer and discharged my body of that
uneasy load  but this was the only time i was ever guilty of so
uncleanly an action for which i cannot but hope the candid reader will
give some allowance after he has maturely and impartially considered my
case and the distress i was in  from this time my constant practice
was as soon as i rose to perform that business in open air at the full
extent of my chain and due care was taken every morning before company
came that the offensive matter should be carried off in wheelbarrows
by two servants appointed for that purpose  i would not have dwelt so
long upon a circumstance that perhaps at first sight may appear not
very momentous if i had not thought it necessary to justify my
character in point of cleanliness to the world which i am told some
of my maligners have been pleased upon this and other occasions to call
in question

when this adventure was at an end i came back out of my house having
occasion for fresh air  the emperor was already descended from the
tower and advancing on horseback towards me which had like to have cost
him dear for the beast though very well trained yet wholly unused to
such a sight which appeared as if a mountain moved before him reared up
on its hinder feet but that prince who is an excellent horseman kept
his seat till his attendants ran in and held the bridle while his
majesty had time to dismount  when he alighted he surveyed me round
with great admiration but kept beyond the length of my chain  he
ordered his cooks and butlers who were already prepared to give me
victuals and drink which they pushed forward in a sort of vehicles upon
wheels till i could reach them  i took these vehicles and soon emptied
them all twenty of them were filled with meat and ten with liquor each
of the former afforded me two or three good mouthfuls and i emptied the
liquor of ten vessels which was contained in earthen vials into one
vehicle drinking it off at a draught and so i did with the rest  the
empress and young princes of the blood of both sexes attended by many
ladies sat at some distance in their chairs but upon the accident that
happened to the emperors horse they alighted and came near his person
which i am now going to describe  he is taller by almost the breadth of
my nail than any of his court which alone is enough to strike an awe
into the beholders  his features are strong and masculine with an
austrian lip and arched nose his complexion olive his countenance
erect his body and limbs well proportioned all his motions graceful
and his deportment majestic  he was then past his prime being
twentyeight years and three quarters old of which he had reigned about
seven in great felicity and generally victorious  for the better
convenience of beholding him i lay on my side so that my face was
parallel to his and he stood but three yards off however i have had
him since many times in my hand and therefore cannot be deceived in the
description  his dress was very plain and simple and the fashion of it
between the asiatic and the european but he had on his head a light
helmet of gold adorned with jewels and a plume on the crest  he held
his sword drawn in his hand to defend himself if i should happen to
break loose it was almost three inches long the hilt and scabbard were
gold enriched with diamonds  his voice was shrill but very clear and
articulate and i could distinctly hear it when i stood up  the ladies
and courtiers were all most magnificently clad so that the spot they
stood upon seemed to resemble a petticoat spread upon the ground
embroidered with figures of gold and silver  his imperial majesty spoke
often to me and i returned answers but neither of us could understand a
syllable  there were several of his priests and lawyers present as i
conjectured by their habits who were commanded to address themselves to
me and i spoke to them in as many languages as i had the least
smattering of which were high and low dutch latin french spanish
italian and lingua franca but all to no purpose  after about two hours
the court retired and i was left with a strong guard to prevent the
impertinence and probably the malice of the rabble who were very
impatient to crowd about me as near as they durst and some of them had
the impudence to shoot their arrows at me as i sat on the ground by the
door of my house whereof one very narrowly missed my left eye  but the
colonel ordered six of the ringleaders to be seized and thought no
punishment so proper as to deliver them bound into my hands which some
of his soldiers accordingly did pushing them forward with the buttends
of their pikes into my reach  i took them all in my right hand put five
of them into my coatpocket and as to the sixth i made a countenance as
if i would eat him alive  the poor man squalled terribly and the
colonel and his officers were in much pain especially when they saw me
take out my penknife but i soon put them out of fear for looking
mildly and immediately cutting the strings he was bound with i set him
gently on the ground and away he ran  i treated the rest in the same
manner taking them one by one out of my pocket and i observed both the
soldiers and people were highly delighted at this mark of my clemency
which was represented very much to my advantage at court

towards night i got with some difficulty into my house where i lay on
the ground and continued to do so about a fortnight during which time
the emperor gave orders to have a bed prepared for me  six hundred beds
of the common measure were brought in carriages and worked up in my
house a hundred and fifty of their beds sewn together made up the
breadth and length and these were four double which however kept me
but very indifferently from the hardness of the floor that was of smooth
stone  by the same computation they provided me with sheets blankets
and coverlets tolerable enough for one who had been so long inured to
hardships

as the news of my arrival spread through the kingdom it brought
prodigious numbers of rich idle and curious people to see me so that
the villages were almost emptied and great neglect of tillage and
household affairs must have ensued if his imperial majesty had not
provided by several proclamations and orders of state against this
inconveniency  he directed that those who had already beheld me should
return home and not presume to come within fifty yards of my house
without license from the court whereby the secretaries of state got
considerable fees

in the mean time the emperor held frequent councils to debate what
course should be taken with me and i was afterwards assured by a
particular friend a person of great quality who was as much in the
secret as any that the court was under many difficulties concerning me
they apprehended my breaking loose that my diet would be very expensive
and might cause a famine  sometimes they determined to starve me or at
least to shoot me in the face and hands with poisoned arrows which would
soon despatch me but again they considered that the stench of so large
a carcass might produce a plague in the metropolis and probably spread
through the whole kingdom  in the midst of these consultations several
officers of the army went to the door of the great councilchamber and
two of them being admitted gave an account of my behaviour to the six
criminals abovementioned which made so favourable an impression in the
breast of his majesty and the whole board in my behalf that an imperial
commission was issued out obliging all the villages nine hundred yards
round the city to deliver in every morning six beeves forty sheep and
other victuals for my sustenance together with a proportionable quantity
of bread and wine and other liquors for the due payment of which his
majesty gave assignments upon his treasury—for this prince lives chiefly
upon his own demesnes seldom except upon great occasions raising any
subsidies upon his subjects who are bound to attend him in his wars at
their own expense  an establishment was also made of six hundred persons
to be my domestics who had boardwages allowed for their maintenance
and tents built for them very conveniently on each side of my door  it
was likewise ordered that three hundred tailors should make me a suit of
clothes after the fashion of the country that six of his majestys
greatest scholars should be employed to instruct me in their language
and lastly that the emperors horses and those of the nobility and
troops of guards should be frequently exercised in my sight to accustom
themselves to me  all these orders were duly put in execution and in
about three weeks i made a great progress in learning their language
during which time the emperor frequently honoured me with his visits and
was pleased to assist my masters in teaching me  we began already to
converse together in some sort and the first words i learnt were to
express my desire that he would please give me my liberty which i
every day repeated on my knees  his answer as i could comprehend it
was that this must be a work of time not to be thought on without the
advice of his council and that first i must lumos kelmin pesso desmar
lon emposo that is swear a peace with him and his kingdom  however
that i should be used with all kindness  and he advised me to acquire
by my patience and discreet behaviour the good opinion of himself and
his subjects  he desired i would not take it ill if he gave orders to
certain proper officers to search me for probably i might carry about me
several weapons which must needs be dangerous things if they answered
the bulk of so prodigious a person  i said his majesty should be
satisfied for i was ready to strip myself and turn up my pockets before
him  this i delivered part in words and part in signs  he replied
that by the laws of the kingdom i must be searched by two of his
officers that he knew this could not be done without my consent and
assistance and he had so good an opinion of my generosity and justice
as to trust their persons in my hands that whatever they took from me
should be returned when i left the country or paid for at the rate which
i would set upon them  i took up the two officers in my hands put them
first into my coatpockets and then into every other pocket about me
except my two fobs and another secret pocket which i had no mind should
be searched wherein i had some little necessaries that were of no
consequence to any but myself  in one of my fobs there was a silver
watch and in the other a small quantity of gold in a purse  these
gentlemen having pen ink and paper about them made an exact
inventory of every thing they saw and when they had done desired i
would set them down that they might deliver it to the emperor  this
inventory i afterwards translated into english and is word for word as
follows

    imprimis in the right coatpocket of the great manmountain for
    so i interpret the words quinbus flestrin after the strictest
    search we found only one great piece of coarsecloth large enough
    to be a footcloth for your majestys chief room of state  in the
    left pocket we saw a huge silver chest with a cover of the same
    metal which we the searchers were not able to lift  we desired it
    should be opened and one of us stepping into it found himself up to
    the mid leg in a sort of dust some part whereof flying up to our
    faces set us both a sneezing for several times together  in his
    right waistcoatpocket we found a prodigious bundle of white thin
    substances folded one over another about the bigness of three men
    tied with a strong cable and marked with black figures which we
    humbly conceive to be writings every letter almost half as large as
    the palm of our hands  in the left there was a sort of engine from
    the back of which were extended twenty long poles resembling the
    pallisados before your majestys court wherewith we conjecture the
    manmountain combs his head for we did not always trouble him with
    questions because we found it a great difficulty to make him
    understand us  in the large pocket on the right side of his middle
    cover so i translate the word ranfulo by which they meant my
    breeches we saw a hollow pillar of iron about the length of a
    man fastened to a strong piece of timber larger than the pillar and
    upon one side of the pillar were huge pieces of iron sticking out
    cut into strange figures which we know not what to make of  in the
    left pocket another engine of the same kind  in the smaller pocket
    on the right side were several round flat pieces of white and red
    metal of different bulk some of the white which seemed to be
    silver were so large and heavy that my comrade and i could hardly
    lift them  in the left pocket were two black pillars irregularly
    shaped we could not without difficulty reach the top of them as
    we stood at the bottom of his pocket  one of them was covered and
    seemed all of a piece but at the upper end of the other there
    appeared a white round substance about twice the bigness of our
    heads  within each of these was enclosed a prodigious plate of
    steel which by our orders we obliged him to show us because we
    apprehended they might be dangerous engines  he took them out of
    their cases and told us that in his own country his practice was to
    shave his beard with one of these and cut his meat with the other
    there were two pockets which we could not enter these he called his
    fobs they were two large slits cut into the top of his middle cover
    but squeezed close by the pressure of his belly  out of the right
    fob hung a great silver chain with a wonderful kind of engine at the
    bottom  we directed him to draw out whatever was at the end of that
    chain which appeared to be a globe half silver and half of some
    transparent metal for on the transparent side we saw certain
    strange figures circularly drawn and thought we could touch them
    till we found our fingers stopped by the lucid substance  he put
    this engine into our ears which made an incessant noise like that
    of a watermill and we conjecture it is either some unknown animal
    or the god that he worships but we are more inclined to the latter
    opinion because he assured us if we understood him right for he
    expressed himself very imperfectly that he seldom did any thing
    without consulting it  he called it his oracle and said it pointed
    out the time for every action of his life  from the left fob he took
    out a net almost large enough for a fisherman but contrived to open
    and shut like a purse and served him for the same use we found
    therein several massy pieces of yellow metal which if they be real
    gold must be of immense value

    having thus in obedience to your majestys commands diligently
    searched all his pockets we observed a girdle about his waist made
    of the hide of some prodigious animal from which on the left side
    hung a sword of the length of five men and on the right a bag or
    pouch divided into two cells each cell capable of holding three of
    your majestys subjects  in one of these cells were several globes
    or balls of a most ponderous metal about the bigness of our heads
    and requiring a strong hand to lift them the other cell contained a
    heap of certain black grains but of no great bulk or weight for we
    could hold above fifty of them in the palms of our hands

    this is an exact inventory of what we found about the body of the
    manmountain who used us with great civility and due respect to
    your majestys commission  signed and sealed on the fourth day of
    the eightyninth moon of your majestys auspicious reign

                                          clefrin frelock marsi frelock

when this inventory was read over to the emperor he directed me
although in very gentle terms to deliver up the several particulars  he
first called for my scimitar which i took out scabbard and all  in the
mean time he ordered three thousand of his choicest troops who then
attended him to surround me at a distance with their bows and arrows
just ready to discharge but i did not observe it for mine eyes were
wholly fixed upon his majesty  he then desired me to draw my scimitar
which although it had got some rust by the sea water was in most
parts exceeding bright  i did so and immediately all the troops gave a
shout between terror and surprise for the sun shone clear and the
reflection dazzled their eyes as i waved the scimitar to and fro in my
hand  his majesty who is a most magnanimous prince was less daunted
than i could expect he ordered me to return it into the scabbard and
cast it on the ground as gently as i could about six feet from the end
of my chain  the next thing he demanded was one of the hollow iron
pillars by which he meant my pocket pistols  i drew it out and at his
desire as well as i could expressed to him the use of it and charging
it only with powder which by the closeness of my pouch happened to
escape wetting in the sea an inconvenience against which all prudent
mariners take special care to provide i first cautioned the emperor not
to be afraid and then i let it off in the air  the astonishment here
was much greater than at the sight of my scimitar  hundreds fell down as
if they had been struck dead and even the emperor although he stood his
ground could not recover himself for some time  i delivered up both my
pistols in the same manner as i had done my scimitar and then my pouch
of powder and bullets begging him that the former might be kept from
fire for it would kindle with the smallest spark and blow up his
imperial palace into the air  i likewise delivered up my watch which
the emperor was very curious to see and commanded two of his tallest
yeomen of the guards to bear it on a pole upon their shoulders as
draymen in england do a barrel of ale  he was amazed at the continual
noise it made and the motion of the minutehand which he could easily
discern for their sight is much more acute than ours he asked the
opinions of his learned men about it which were various and remote as
the reader may well imagine without my repeating although indeed i could
not very perfectly understand them  i then gave up my silver and copper
money my purse with nine large pieces of gold and some smaller ones
my knife and razor my comb and silver snuffbox my handkerchief and
journalbook  my scimitar pistols and pouch were conveyed in
carriages to his majestys stores but the rest of my goods were returned
me

i had as i before observed one private pocket which escaped their
search wherein there was a pair of spectacles which i sometimes use for
the weakness of mine eyes a pocket perspective and some other little
conveniences which being of no consequence to the emperor i did not
think myself bound in honour to discover and i apprehended they might be
lost or spoiled if i ventured them out of my possession



chapter iii


the author diverts the emperor and his nobility of both sexes in a very
uncommon manner  the diversions of the court of lilliput described  the
author has his liberty granted him upon certain conditions

my gentleness and good behaviour had gained so far on the emperor and his
court and indeed upon the army and people in general that i began to
conceive hopes of getting my liberty in a short time  i took all
possible methods to cultivate this favourable disposition  the natives
came by degrees to be less apprehensive of any danger from me  i would
sometimes lie down and let five or six of them dance on my hand and at
last the boys and girls would venture to come and play at hideandseek
in my hair  i had now made a good progress in understanding and speaking
the language  the emperor had a mind one day to entertain me with
several of the country shows wherein they exceed all nations i have
known both for dexterity and magnificence  i was diverted with none so
much as that of the ropedancers performed upon a slender white thread
extended about two feet and twelve inches from the ground  upon which i
shall desire liberty with the readers patience to enlarge a little

this diversion is only practised by those persons who are candidates for
great employments and high favour at court  they are trained in this
art from their youth and are not always of noble birth or liberal
education  when a great office is vacant either by death or disgrace
which often happens five or six of those candidates petition the
emperor to entertain his majesty and the court with a dance on the rope
and whoever jumps the highest without falling succeeds in the office
very often the chief ministers themselves are commanded to show their
skill and to convince the emperor that they have not lost their faculty
flimnap the treasurer is allowed to cut a caper on the straight rope
at least an inch higher than any other lord in the whole empire  i have
seen him do the summerset several times together upon a trencher fixed
on a rope which is no thicker than a common packthread in england  my
friend reldresal principal secretary for private affairs is in my
opinion if i am not partial the second after the treasurer the rest of
the great officers are much upon a par

these diversions are often attended with fatal accidents whereof great
numbers are on record  i myself have seen two or three candidates break
a limb  but the danger is much greater when the ministers themselves
are commanded to show their dexterity for by contending to excel
themselves and their fellows they strain so far that there is hardly one
of them who has not received a fall and some of them two or three  i
was assured that a year or two before my arrival flimnap would
infallibly have broke his neck if one of the kings cushions that
accidentally lay on the ground had not weakened the force of his fall

there is likewise another diversion which is only shown before the
emperor and empress and first minister upon particular occasions  the
emperor lays on the table three fine silken threads of six inches long
one is blue the other red and the third green  these threads are
proposed as prizes for those persons whom the emperor has a mind to
distinguish by a peculiar mark of his favour  the ceremony is performed
in his majestys great chamber of state where the candidates are to
undergo a trial of dexterity very different from the former and such as
i have not observed the least resemblance of in any other country of the
new or old world  the emperor holds a stick in his hands both ends
parallel to the horizon while the candidates advancing one by one
sometimes leap over the stick sometimes creep under it backward and
forward several times according as the stick is advanced or depressed
sometimes the emperor holds one end of the stick and his first minister
the other sometimes the minister has it entirely to himself  whoever
performs his part with most agility and holds out the longest in leaping
and creeping is rewarded with the bluecoloured silk the red is given
to the next and the green to the third which they all wear girt twice
round about the middle and you see few great persons about this court
who are not adorned with one of these girdles

the horses of the army and those of the royal stables having been daily
led before me were no longer shy but would come up to my very feet
without starting  the riders would leap them over my hand as i held it
on the ground and one of the emperors huntsmen upon a large courser
took my foot shoe and all which was indeed a prodigious leap  i had
the good fortune to divert the emperor one day after a very extraordinary
manner  i desired he would order several sticks of two feet high and
the thickness of an ordinary cane to be brought me whereupon his
majesty commanded the master of his woods to give directions accordingly
and the next morning six woodmen arrived with as many carriages drawn by
eight horses to each  i took nine of these sticks and fixing them
firmly in the ground in a quadrangular figure two feet and a half
square i took four other sticks and tied them parallel at each corner
about two feet from the ground then i fastened my handkerchief to the
nine sticks that stood erect and extended it on all sides till it was
tight as the top of a drum and the four parallel sticks rising about
five inches higher than the handkerchief served as ledges on each side
when i had finished my work i desired the emperor to let a troop of his
best horses twentyfour in number come and exercise upon this plain
his majesty approved of the proposal and i took them up one by one in
my hands ready mounted and armed with the proper officers to exercise
them  as soon as they got into order they divided into two parties
performed mock skirmishes discharged blunt arrows drew their swords
fled and pursued attacked and retired and in short discovered the best
military discipline i ever beheld  the parallel sticks secured them and
their horses from falling over the stage and the emperor was so much
delighted that he ordered this entertainment to be repeated several
days and once was pleased to be lifted up and give the word of command
and with great difficulty persuaded even the empress herself to let me
hold her in her close chair within two yards of the stage when she was
able to take a full view of the whole performance  it was my good
fortune that no ill accident happened in these entertainments only once
a fiery horse that belonged to one of the captains pawing with his
hoof struck a hole in my handkerchief and his foot slipping he
overthrew his rider and himself but i immediately relieved them both
and covering the hole with one hand i set down the troop with the other
in the same manner as i took them up the horse that fell was strained in
the left shoulder but the rider got no hurt and i repaired my
handkerchief as well as i could however i would not trust to the
strength of it any more in such dangerous enterprises

about two or three days before i was set at liberty as i was
entertaining the court with this kind of feat there arrived an express
to inform his majesty that some of his subjects riding near the place
where i was first taken up had seen a great black substance lying on the
around very oddly shaped extending its edges round as wide as his
majestys bedchamber and rising up in the middle as high as a man that
it was no living creature as they at first apprehended for it lay on
the grass without motion and some of them had walked round it several
times that by mounting upon each others shoulders they had got to the
top which was flat and even and stamping upon it they found that it
was hollow within that they humbly conceived it might be something
belonging to the manmountain and if his majesty pleased they would
undertake to bring it with only five horses  i presently knew what they
meant and was glad at heart to receive this intelligence  it seems
upon my first reaching the shore after our shipwreck i was in such
confusion that before i came to the place where i went to sleep my hat
which i had fastened with a string to my head while i was rowing and had
stuck on all the time i was swimming fell off after i came to land the
string as i conjecture breaking by some accident which i never
observed but thought my hat had been lost at sea  i entreated his
imperial majesty to give orders it might be brought to me as soon as
possible describing to him the use and the nature of it and the next
day the waggoners arrived with it but not in a very good condition they
had bored two holes in the brim within an inch and half of the edge and
fastened two hooks in the holes these hooks were tied by a long cord to
the harness and thus my hat was dragged along for above half an english
mile but the ground in that country being extremely smooth and level
it received less damage than i expected

two days after this adventure the emperor having ordered that part of
his army which quarters in and about his metropolis to be in readiness
took a fancy of diverting himself in a very singular manner  he desired
i would stand like a colossus with my legs as far asunder as i
conveniently could  he then commanded his general who was an old
experienced leader and a great patron of mine to draw up the troops in
close order and march them under me the foot by twentyfour abreast
and the horse by sixteen with drums beating colours flying and pikes
advanced  this body consisted of three thousand foot and a thousand
horse  his majesty gave orders upon pain of death that every soldier
in his march should observe the strictest decency with regard to my
person which however could not prevent some of the younger officers from
turning up their eyes as they passed under me and to confess the truth
my breeches were at that time in so ill a condition that they afforded
some opportunities for laughter and admiration

i had sent so many memorials and petitions for my liberty that his
majesty at length mentioned the matter first in the cabinet and then in
a full council where it was opposed by none except skyresh bolgolam
who was pleased without any provocation to be my mortal enemy  but it
was carried against him by the whole board and confirmed by the emperor
that minister was galbet or admiral of the realm very much in his
masters confidence and a person well versed in affairs but of a morose
and sour complexion  however he was at length persuaded to comply but
prevailed that the articles and conditions upon which i should be set
free and to which i must swear should be drawn up by himself  these
articles were brought to me by skyresh bolgolam in person attended by two
undersecretaries and several persons of distinction  after they were
read i was demanded to swear to the performance of them first in the
manner of my own country and afterwards in the method prescribed by
their laws which was to hold my right foot in my left hand and to
place the middle finger of my right hand on the crown of my head and my
thumb on the tip of my right ear  but because the reader may be curious
to have some idea of the style and manner of expression peculiar to that
people as well as to know the article upon which i recovered my liberty
i have made a translation of the whole instrument word for word as near
as i was able which i here offer to the public

golbasto momarem evlame gurdilo shefin mully ully gue most mighty
emperor of lilliput delight and terror of the universe whose dominions
extend five thousand blustrugs about twelve miles in circumference to
the extremities of the globe monarch of all monarchs taller than the
sons of men whose feet press down to the centre and whose head strikes
against the sun at whose nod the princes of the earth shake their knees
pleasant as the spring comfortable as the summer fruitful as autumn
dreadful as winter his most sublime majesty proposes to the
manmountain lately arrived at our celestial dominions the following
articles which by a solemn oath he shall be obliged to perform—

1st the manmountain shall not depart from our dominions without our
license under our great seal

2d he shall not presume to come into our metropolis without our
express order at which time the inhabitants shall have two hours
warning to keep within doors

3d the said manmountain shall confine his walks to our principal high
roads and not offer to walk or lie down in a meadow or field of corn

4th as he walks the said roads he shall take the utmost care not to
trample upon the bodies of any of our loving subjects their horses or
carriages nor take any of our subjects into his hands without their own
consent

5th if an express requires extraordinary despatch the manmountain
shall be obliged to carry in his pocket the messenger and horse a six
days journey once in every moon and return the said messenger back if
so required safe to our imperial presence

6th he shall be our ally against our enemies in the island of blefuscu
and do his utmost to destroy their fleet which is now preparing to
invade us

7th that the said manmountain shall at his times of leisure be
aiding and assisting to our workmen in helping to raise certain great
stones towards covering the wall of the principal park and other our
royal buildings

8th that the said manmountain shall in two moons time deliver in an
exact survey of the circumference of our dominions by a computation of
his own paces round the coast

lastly that upon his solemn oath to observe all the above articles
the said manmountain shall have a daily allowance of meat and drink
sufficient for the support of 1724 of our subjects with free access to
our royal person and other marks of our favour  given at our palace at
belfaborac the twelfth day of the ninetyfirst moon of our reign

i swore and subscribed to these articles with great cheerfulness and
content although some of them were not so honourable as i could have
wished which proceeded wholly from the malice of skyresh bolgolam the
highadmiral whereupon my chains were immediately unlocked and i was at
full liberty  the emperor himself in person did me the honour to be by
at the whole ceremony  i made my acknowledgements by prostrating myself
at his majestys feet but he commanded me to rise and after many
gracious expressions which to avoid the censure of vanity i shall not
repeat he added that he hoped i should prove a useful servant and
well deserve all the favours he had already conferred upon me or might
do for the future

the reader may please to observe that in the last article of the
recovery of my liberty the emperor stipulates to allow me a quantity of
meat and drink sufficient for the support of 1724 lilliputians  some
time after asking a friend at court how they came to fix on that
determinate number he told me that his majestys mathematicians having
taken the height of my body by the help of a quadrant and finding it to
exceed theirs in the proportion of twelve to one they concluded from the
similarity of their bodies that mine must contain at least 1724 of
theirs and consequently would require as much food as was necessary to
support that number of lilliputians  by which the reader may conceive an
idea of the ingenuity of that people as well as the prudent and exact
economy of so great a prince



chapter iv


mildendo the metropolis of lilliput described together with the
emperors palace  a conversation between the author and a principal
secretary concerning the affairs of that empire  the authors offers to
serve the emperor in his wars

the first request i made after i had obtained my liberty was that i
might have license to see mildendo the metropolis which the emperor
easily granted me but with a special charge to do no hurt either to the
inhabitants or their houses  the people had notice by proclamation of
my design to visit the town  the wall which encompassed it is two feet
and a half high and at least eleven inches broad so that a coach and
horses may be driven very safely round it and it is flanked with strong
towers at ten feet distance  i stepped over the great western gate and
passed very gently and sidling through the two principal streets only
in my short waistcoat for fear of damaging the roofs and eaves of the
houses with the skirts of my coat  i walked with the utmost
circumspection to avoid treading on any stragglers who might remain in
the streets although the orders were very strict that all people should
keep in their houses at their own peril  the garret windows and tops of
houses were so crowded with spectators that i thought in all my travels
i had not seen a more populous place  the city is an exact square each
side of the wall being five hundred feet long  the two great streets
which run across and divide it into four quarters are five feet wide
the lanes and alleys which i could not enter but only view them as i
passed are from twelve to eighteen inches  the town is capable of
holding five hundred thousand souls the houses are from three to five
stories the shops and markets well provided

the emperors palace is in the centre of the city where the two great
streets meet  it is enclosed by a wall of two feet high and twenty feet
distance from the buildings  i had his majestys permission to step over
this wall and the space being so wide between that and the palace i
could easily view it on every side  the outward court is a square of
forty feet and includes two other courts in the inmost are the royal
apartments which i was very desirous to see but found it extremely
difficult for the great gates from one square into another were but
eighteen inches high and seven inches wide  now the buildings of the
outer court were at least five feet high and it was impossible for me to
stride over them without infinite damage to the pile though the walls
were strongly built of hewn stone and four inches thick  at the same
time the emperor had a great desire that i should see the magnificence of
his palace but this i was not able to do till three days after which i
spent in cutting down with my knife some of the largest trees in the
royal park about a hundred yards distant from the city  of these trees
i made two stools each about three feet high and strong enough to bear
my weight  the people having received notice a second time i went again
through the city to the palace with my two stools in my hands  when i
came to the side of the outer court i stood upon one stool and took the
other in my hand this i lifted over the roof and gently set it down on
the space between the first and second court which was eight feet wide
i then stept over the building very conveniently from one stool to the
other and drew up the first after me with a hooked stick  by this
contrivance i got into the inmost court and lying down upon my side i
applied my face to the windows of the middle stories which were left
open on purpose and discovered the most splendid apartments that can be
imagined  there i saw the empress and the young princes in their
several lodgings with their chief attendants about them  her imperial
majesty was pleased to smile very graciously upon me and gave me out of
the window her hand to kiss

but i shall not anticipate the reader with further descriptions of this
kind because i reserve them for a greater work which is now almost
ready for the press containing a general description of this empire
from its first erection through along series of princes with a
particular account of their wars and politics laws learning and
religion their plants and animals their peculiar manners and customs
with other matters very curious and useful my chief design at present
being only to relate such events and transactions as happened to the
public or to myself during a residence of about nine months in that
empire

one morning about a fortnight after i had obtained my liberty
reldresal principal secretary as they style him for private affairs
came to my house attended only by one servant  he ordered his coach to
wait at a distance and desired i would give him an hours audience which
i readily consented to on account of his quality and personal merits as
well as of the many good offices he had done me during my solicitations
at court  i offered to lie down that he might the more conveniently
reach my ear but he chose rather to let me hold him in my hand during
our conversation  he began with compliments on my liberty said he
might pretend to some merit in it but however added that if it had
not been for the present situation of things at court perhaps i might
not have obtained it so soon  for said he as flourishing a condition
as we may appear to be in to foreigners we labour under two mighty
evils a violent faction at home and the danger of an invasion by a
most potent enemy from abroad  as to the first you are to understand
that for about seventy moons past there have been two struggling parties
in this empire under the names of tramecksan and slamecksan from
the high and low heels of their shoes by which they distinguish
themselves  it is alleged indeed that the high heels are most
agreeable to our ancient constitution but however this be his majesty
has determined to make use only of low heels in the administration of the
government and all offices in the gift of the crown as you cannot but
observe and particularly that his majestys imperial heels are lower at
least by a drurr than any of his court drurr is a measure about the
fourteenth part of an inch  the animosities between these two parties
run so high that they will neither eat nor drink nor talk with each
other  we compute the tramecksan or high heels to exceed us in
number but the power is wholly on our side  we apprehend his imperial
highness the heir to the crown to have some tendency towards the high
heels at least we can plainly discover that one of his heels is higher
than the other which gives him a hobble in his gait  now in the midst
of these intestine disquiets we are threatened with an invasion from the
island of blefuscu which is the other great empire of the universe
almost as large and powerful as this of his majesty  for as to what we
have heard you affirm that there are other kingdoms and states in the
world inhabited by human creatures as large as yourself our philosophers
are in much doubt and would rather conjecture that you dropped from the
moon or one of the stars because it is certain that a hundred mortals
of your bulk would in a short time destroy all the fruits and cattle of
his majestys dominions besides our histories of six thousand moons
make no mention of any other regions than the two great empires of
lilliput and blefuscu  which two mighty powers have as i was going to
tell you been engaged in a most obstinate war for sixandthirty moons
past  it began upon the following occasion  it is allowed on all hands
that the primitive way of breaking eggs before we eat them was upon the
larger end but his present majestys grandfather while he was a boy
going to eat an egg and breaking it according to the ancient practice
happened to cut one of his fingers  whereupon the emperor his father
published an edict commanding all his subjects upon great penalties to
break the smaller end of their eggs  the people so highly resented this
law that our histories tell us there have been six rebellions raised on
that account wherein one emperor lost his life and another his crown
these civil commotions were constantly fomented by the monarchs of
blefuscu and when they were quelled the exiles always fled for refuge
to that empire  it is computed that eleven thousand persons have at
several times suffered death rather than submit to break their eggs at
the smaller end  many hundred large volumes have been published upon
this controversy but the books of the bigendians have been long
forbidden and the whole party rendered incapable by law of holding
employments  during the course of these troubles the emperors of
blefusca did frequently expostulate by their ambassadors accusing us of
making a schism in religion by offending against a fundamental doctrine
of our great prophet lustrog in the fiftyfourth chapter of the
blundecral which is their alcoran  this however is thought to be a
mere strain upon the text for the words are these that all true
believers break their eggs at the convenient end  and which is the
convenient end seems in my humble opinion to be left to every mans
conscience or at least in the power of the chief magistrate to
determine  now the bigendian exiles have found so much credit in the
emperor of blefuscus court and so much private assistance and
encouragement from their party here at home that a bloody war has been
carried on between the two empires for sixandthirty moons with various
success during which time we have lost forty capital ships and a much a
greater number of smaller vessels together with thirty thousand of our
best seamen and soldiers and the damage received by the enemy is
reckoned to be somewhat greater than ours  however they have now
equipped a numerous fleet and are just preparing to make a descent upon
us and his imperial majesty placing great confidence in your valour and
strength has commanded me to lay this account of his affairs before
you

i desired the secretary to present my humble duty to the emperor and to
let him know that i thought it would not become me who was a
foreigner to interfere with parties but i was ready with the hazard of
my life to defend his person and state against all invaders



chapter v


the author by an extraordinary stratagem prevents an invasion  a high
title of honour is conferred upon him  ambassadors arrive from the
emperor of blefuscu and sue for peace  the empresss apartment on fire
by an accident the author instrumental in saving the rest of the palace

the empire of blefuscu is an island situated to the northeast of
lilliput from which it is parted only by a channel of eight hundred
yards wide  i had not yet seen it and upon this notice of an intended
invasion i avoided appearing on that side of the coast for fear of
being discovered by some of the enemys ships who had received no
intelligence of me all intercourse between the two empires having been
strictly forbidden during the war upon pain of death and an embargo
laid by our emperor upon all vessels whatsoever  i communicated to his
majesty a project i had formed of seizing the enemys whole fleet which
as our scouts assured us lay at anchor in the harbour ready to sail
with the first fair wind  i consulted the most experienced seamen upon
the depth of the channel which they had often plumbed who told me that
in the middle at highwater it was seventy glumgluffs deep which is
about six feet of european measure and the rest of it fifty glumgluffs
at most  i walked towards the northeast coast over against blefuscu
where lying down behind a hillock i took out my small perspective
glass and viewed the enemys fleet at anchor consisting of about fifty
men of war and a great number of transports i then came back to my
house and gave orders for which i had a warrant for a great quantity
of the strongest cable and bars of iron  the cable was about as thick as
packthread and the bars of the length and size of a knittingneedle  i
trebled the cable to make it stronger and for the same reason i twisted
three of the iron bars together bending the extremities into a hook
having thus fixed fifty hooks to as many cables i went back to the
northeast coast and putting off my coat shoes and stockings walked
into the sea in my leathern jerkin about half an hour before high
water  i waded with what haste i could and swam in the middle about
thirty yards till i felt ground  i arrived at the fleet in less than
half an hour  the enemy was so frightened when they saw me that they
leaped out of their ships and swam to shore where there could not be
fewer than thirty thousand souls  i then took my tackling and
fastening a hook to the hole at the prow of each i tied all the cords
together at the end  while i was thus employed the enemy discharged
several thousand arrows many of which stuck in my hands and face and
beside the excessive smart gave me much disturbance in my work  my
greatest apprehension was for mine eyes which i should have infallibly
lost if i had not suddenly thought of an expedient  i kept among other
little necessaries a pair of spectacles in a private pocket which as i
observed before had escaped the emperors searchers  these i took out
and fastened as strongly as i could upon my nose and thus armed went on
boldly with my work in spite of the enemys arrows many of which struck
against the glasses of my spectacles but without any other effect
further than a little to discompose them  i had now fastened all the
hooks and taking the knot in my hand began to pull but not a ship
would stir for they were all too fast held by their anchors so that the
boldest part of my enterprise remained  i therefore let go the cord and
leaving the hooks fixed to the ships i resolutely cut with my knife the
cables that fastened the anchors receiving about two hundred shots in my
face and hands then i took up the knotted end of the cables to which my
hooks were tied and with great ease drew fifty of the enemys largest
men of war after me

the blefuscudians who had not the least imagination of what i intended
were at first confounded with astonishment  they had seen me cut the
cables and thought my design was only to let the ships run adrift or
fall foul on each other but when they perceived the whole fleet moving
in order and saw me pulling at the end they set up such a scream of
grief and despair as it is almost impossible to describe or conceive
when i had got out of danger i stopped awhile to pick out the arrows
that stuck in my hands and face and rubbed on some of the same ointment
that was given me at my first arrival as i have formerly mentioned  i
then took off my spectacles and waiting about an hour till the tide was
a little fallen i waded through the middle with my cargo and arrived
safe at the royal port of lilliput

the emperor and his whole court stood on the shore expecting the issue
of this great adventure  they saw the ships move forward in a large
halfmoon but could not discern me who was up to my breast in water
when i advanced to the middle of the channel they were yet more in pain
because i was under water to my neck  the emperor concluded me to be
drowned and that the enemys fleet was approaching in a hostile manner
but he was soon eased of his fears for the channel growing shallower
every step i made i came in a short time within hearing and holding up
the end of the cable by which the fleet was fastened i cried in a loud
voice long live the most puissant king of lilliput  this great prince
received me at my landing with all possible encomiums and created me a
nardac upon the spot which is the highest title of honour among them

his majesty desired i would take some other opportunity of bringing all
the rest of his enemys ships into his ports  and so unmeasureable is
the ambition of princes that he seemed to think of nothing less than
reducing the whole empire of blefuscu into a province and governing it
by a viceroy of destroying the bigendian exiles and compelling that
people to break the smaller end of their eggs by which he would remain
the sole monarch of the whole world  but i endeavoured to divert him
from this design by many arguments drawn from the topics of policy as
well as justice and i plainly protested that i would never be an
instrument of bringing a free and brave people into slavery  and when
the matter was debated in council the wisest part of the ministry were
of my opinion

this open bold declaration of mine was so opposite to the schemes and
politics of his imperial majesty that he could never forgive me  he
mentioned it in a very artful manner at council where i was told that
some of the wisest appeared at least by their silence to be of my
opinion but others who were my secret enemies could not forbear some
expressions which by a sidewind reflected on me  and from this time
began an intrigue between his majesty and a junto of ministers
maliciously bent against me which broke out in less than two months and
had like to have ended in my utter destruction  of so little weight are
the greatest services to princes when put into the balance with a
refusal to gratify their passions

about three weeks after this exploit there arrived a solemn embassy from
blefuscu with humble offers of a peace which was soon concluded upon
conditions very advantageous to our emperor wherewith i shall not
trouble the reader  there were six ambassadors with a train of about
five hundred persons and their entry was very magnificent suitable to
the grandeur of their master and the importance of their business  when
their treaty was finished wherein i did them several good offices by the
credit i now had or at least appeared to have at court their
excellencies who were privately told how much i had been their friend
made me a visit in form  they began with many compliments upon my valour
and generosity invited me to that kingdom in the emperor their masters
name and desired me to show them some proofs of my prodigious strength
of which they had heard so many wonders wherein i readily obliged them
but shall not trouble the reader with the particulars

when i had for some time entertained their excellencies to their
infinite satisfaction and surprise i desired they would do me the honour
to present my most humble respects to the emperor their master the
renown of whose virtues had so justly filled the whole world with
admiration and whose royal person i resolved to attend before i
returned to my own country  accordingly the next time i had the honour
to see our emperor i desired his general license to wait on the
blefuscudian monarch which he was pleased to grant me as i could
perceive in a very cold manner but could not guess the reason till i
had a whisper from a certain person that flimnap and bolgolam had
represented my intercourse with those ambassadors as a mark of
disaffection from which i am sure my heart was wholly free  and this
was the first time i began to conceive some imperfect idea of courts and
ministers

it is to be observed that these ambassadors spoke to me by an
interpreter the languages of both empires differing as much from each
other as any two in europe and each nation priding itself upon the
antiquity beauty and energy of their own tongue with an avowed
contempt for that of their neighbour yet our emperor standing upon the
advantage he had got by the seizure of their fleet obliged them to
deliver their credentials and make their speech in the lilliputian
tongue  and it must be confessed that from the great intercourse of
trade and commerce between both realms from the continual reception of
exiles which is mutual among them and from the custom in each empire
to send their young nobility and richer gentry to the other in order to
polish themselves by seeing the world and understanding men and manners
there are few persons of distinction or merchants or seamen who dwell
in the maritime parts but what can hold conversation in both tongues as
i found some weeks after when i went to pay my respects to the emperor
of blefuscu which in the midst of great misfortunes through the malice
of my enemies proved a very happy adventure to me as i shall relate in
its proper place

the reader may remember that when i signed those articles upon which i
recovered my liberty there were some which i disliked upon account of
their being too servile neither could anything but an extreme necessity
have forced me to submit  but being now a nardac of the highest rank
in that empire such offices were looked upon as below my dignity and
the emperor to do him justice never once mentioned them to me
however it was not long before i had an opportunity of doing his
majesty at least as i then thought a most signal service  i was
alarmed at midnight with the cries of many hundred people at my door by
which being suddenly awaked i was in some kind of terror  i heard the
word burglum repeated incessantly several of the emperors court
making their way through the crowd entreated me to come immediately to
the palace where her imperial majestys apartment was on fire by the
carelessness of a maid of honour who fell asleep while she was reading a
romance  i got up in an instant and orders being given to clear the way
before me and it being likewise a moonshine night i made a shift to get
to the palace without trampling on any of the people  i found they had
already applied ladders to the walls of the apartment and were well
provided with buckets but the water was at some distance  these buckets
were about the size of large thimbles and the poor people supplied me
with them as fast as they could but the flame was so violent that they
did little good  i might easily have stifled it with my coat which i
unfortunately left behind me for haste and came away only in my leathern
jerkin  the case seemed wholly desperate and deplorable and this
magnificent palace would have infallibly been burnt down to the ground
if by a presence of mind unusual to me i had not suddenly thought of an
expedient  i had the evening before drunk plentifully of a most
delicious wine called glimigrim the blefuscudians call it flunec
but ours is esteemed the better sort which is very diuretic  by the
luckiest chance in the world i had not discharged myself of any part of
it  the heat i had contracted by coming very near the flames and by
labouring to quench them made the wine begin to operate by urine which
i voided in such a quantity and applied so well to the proper places
that in three minutes the fire was wholly extinguished and the rest of
that noble pile which had cost so many ages in erecting preserved from
destruction

it was now daylight and i returned to my house without waiting to
congratulate with the emperor because although i had done a very
eminent piece of service yet i could not tell how his majesty might
resent the manner by which i had performed it for by the fundamental
laws of the realm it is capital in any person of what quality soever
to make water within the precincts of the palace  but i was a little
comforted by a message from his majesty that he would give orders to
the grand justiciary for passing my pardon in form which however i
could not obtain and i was privately assured that the empress
conceiving the greatest abhorrence of what i had done removed to the
most distant side of the court firmly resolved that those buildings
should never be repaired for her use and in the presence of her chief
confidents could not forbear vowing revenge



chapter vi


of the inhabitants of lilliput their learning laws and customs the
manner of educating their children  the authors way of living in that
country  his vindication of a great lady

although i intend to leave the description of this empire to a particular
treatise yet in the mean time i am content to gratify the curious
reader with some general ideas  as the common size of the natives is
somewhat under six inches high so there is an exact proportion in all
other animals as well as plants and trees for instance the tallest
horses and oxen are between four and five inches in height the sheep an
inch and half more or less their geese about the bigness of a sparrow
and so the several gradations downwards till you come to the smallest
which to my sight were almost invisible but nature has adapted the eyes
of the lilliputians to all objects proper for their view they see with
great exactness but at no great distance  and to show the sharpness of
their sight towards objects that are near i have been much pleased with
observing a cook pulling a lark which was not so large as a common fly
and a young girl threading an invisible needle with invisible silk
their tallest trees are about seven feet high i mean some of those in
the great royal park the tops whereof i could but just reach with my
fist clenched  the other vegetables are in the same proportion but this
i leave to the readers imagination

i shall say but little at present of their learning which for many
ages has flourished in all its branches among them but their manner of
writing is very peculiar being neither from the left to the right like
the europeans nor from the right to the left like the arabians nor
from up to down like the chinese but aslant from one corner of the
paper to the other like ladies in england

they bury their dead with their heads directly downward because they
hold an opinion that in eleven thousand moons they are all to rise
again in which period the earth which they conceive to be flat will
turn upside down and by this means they shall at their resurrection be
found ready standing on their feet  the learned among them confess the
absurdity of this doctrine but the practice still continues in
compliance to the vulgar

there are some laws and customs in this empire very peculiar and if they
were not so directly contrary to those of my own dear country i should
be tempted to say a little in their justification  it is only to be
wished they were as well executed  the first i shall mention relates to
informers  all crimes against the state are punished here with the
utmost severity but if the person accused makes his innocence plainly
to appear upon his trial the accuser is immediately put to an
ignominious death and out of his goods or lands the innocent person is
quadruply recompensed for the loss of his time for the danger he
underwent for the hardship of his imprisonment and for all the charges
he has been at in making his defence or if that fund be deficient it
is largely supplied by the crown  the emperor also confers on him some
public mark of his favour and proclamation is made of his innocence
through the whole city

they look upon fraud as a greater crime than theft and therefore seldom
fail to punish it with death for they allege that care and vigilance
with a very common understanding may preserve a mans goods from
thieves but honesty has no defence against superior cunning and since
it is necessary that there should be a perpetual intercourse of buying
and selling and dealing upon credit where fraud is permitted and
connived at or has no law to punish it the honest dealer is always
undone and the knave gets the advantage  i remember when i was once
interceding with the emperor for a criminal who had wronged his master of
a great sum of money which he had received by order and ran away with
and happening to tell his majesty by way of extenuation that it was
only a breach of trust the emperor thought it monstrous in me to offer
as a defence the greatest aggravation of the crime and truly i had
little to say in return farther than the common answer that different
nations had different customs for i confess i was heartily ashamed
330

although we usually call reward and punishment the two hinges upon which
all government turns yet i could never observe this maxim to be put in
practice by any nation except that of lilliput  whoever can there bring
sufficient proof that he has strictly observed the laws of his country
for seventythree moons has a claim to certain privileges according to
his quality or condition of life with a proportionable sum of money out
of a fund appropriated for that use he likewise acquires the title of
snilpall or legal which is added to his name but does not descend to
his posterity  and these people thought it a prodigious defect of policy
among us when i told them that our laws were enforced only by penalties
without any mention of reward  it is upon this account that the image of
justice in their courts of judicature is formed with six eyes two
before as many behind and on each side one to signify circumspection
with a bag of gold open in her right hand and a sword sheathed in her
left to show she is more disposed to reward than to punish

in choosing persons for all employments they have more regard to good
morals than to great abilities for since government is necessary to
mankind they believe that the common size of human understanding is
fitted to some station or other and that providence never intended to
make the management of public affairs a mystery to be comprehended only
by a few persons of sublime genius of which there seldom are three born
in an age but they suppose truth justice temperance and the like to
be in every mans power the practice of which virtues assisted by
experience and a good intention would qualify any man for the service of
his country except where a course of study is required  but they
thought the want of moral virtues was so far from being supplied by
superior endowments of the mind that employments could never be put into
such dangerous hands as those of persons so qualified and at least
that the mistakes committed by ignorance in a virtuous disposition
would never be of such fatal consequence to the public weal as the
practices of a man whose inclinations led him to be corrupt and who had
great abilities to manage to multiply and defend his corruptions

in like manner the disbelief of a divine providence renders a man
incapable of holding any public station for since kings avow themselves
to be the deputies of providence the lilliputians think nothing can be
more absurd than for a prince to employ such men as disown the authority
under which he acts

in relating these and the following laws i would only be understood to
mean the original institutions and not the most scandalous corruptions
into which these people are fallen by the degenerate nature of man  for
as to that infamous practice of acquiring great employments by dancing on
the ropes or badges of favour and distinction by leaping over sticks and
creeping under them the reader is to observe that they were first
introduced by the grandfather of the emperor now reigning and grew to
the present height by the gradual increase of party and faction

ingratitude is among them a capital crime as we read it to have been in
some other countries for they reason thus that whoever makes ill
returns to his benefactor must needs be a common enemy to the rest of
mankind from whom he has received no obligation and therefore such a
man is not fit to live

their notions relating to the duties of parents and children differ
extremely from ours  for since the conjunction of male and female is
founded upon the great law of nature in order to propagate and continue
the species the lilliputians will needs have it that men and women are
joined together like other animals by the motives of concupiscence and
that their tenderness towards their young proceeds from the like natural
principle for which reason they will never allow that a child is under
any obligation to his father for begetting him or to his mother for
bringing him into the world which considering the miseries of human
life was neither a benefit in itself nor intended so by his parents
whose thoughts in their love encounters were otherwise employed  upon
these and the like reasonings their opinion is that parents are the
last of all others to be trusted with the education of their own
children and therefore they have in every town public nurseries where
all parents except cottagers and labourers are obliged to send their
infants of both sexes to be reared and educated when they come to the
age of twenty moons at which time they are supposed to have some
rudiments of docility  these schools are of several kinds suited to
different qualities and both sexes  they have certain professors well
skilled in preparing children for such a condition of life as befits the
rank of their parents and their own capacities as well as inclinations
i shall first say something of the male nurseries and then of the
female

the nurseries for males of noble or eminent birth are provided with
grave and learned professors and their several deputies  the clothes
and food of the children are plain and simple  they are bred up in the
principles of honour justice courage modesty clemency religion and
love of their country they are always employed in some business except
in the times of eating and sleeping which are very short and two hours
for diversions consisting of bodily exercises  they are dressed by men
till four years of age and then are obliged to dress themselves
although their quality be ever so great and the women attendant who are
aged proportionably to ours at fifty perform only the most menial
offices  they are never suffered to converse with servants but go
together in smaller or greater numbers to take their diversions and
always in the presence of a professor or one of his deputies whereby
they avoid those early bad impressions of folly and vice to which our
children are subject  their parents are suffered to see them only twice
a year the visit is to last but an hour they are allowed to kiss the
child at meeting and parting but a professor who always stands by on
those occasions will not suffer them to whisper or use any fondling
expressions or bring any presents of toys sweetmeats and the like

the pension from each family for the education and entertainment of a
child upon failure of due payment is levied by the emperors officers

the nurseries for children of ordinary gentlemen merchants traders and
handicrafts are managed proportionably after the same manner only those
designed for trades are put out apprentices at eleven years old whereas
those of persons of quality continue in their exercises till fifteen
which answers to twentyone with us but the confinement is gradually
lessened for the last three years

in the female nurseries the young girls of quality are educated much
like the males only they are dressed by orderly servants of their own
sex but always in the presence of a professor or deputy till they come
to dress themselves which is at five years old  and if it be found that
these nurses ever presume to entertain the girls with frightful or
foolish stories or the common follies practised by chambermaids among
us they are publicly whipped thrice about the city imprisoned for a
year and banished for life to the most desolate part of the country
thus the young ladies are as much ashamed of being cowards and fools as
the men and despise all personal ornaments beyond decency and
cleanliness neither did i perceive any difference in their education
made by their difference of sex only that the exercises of the females
were not altogether so robust and that some rules were given them
relating to domestic life and a smaller compass of learning was enjoined
them for their maxim is that among peoples of quality a wife should be
always a reasonable and agreeable companion because she cannot always be
young  when the girls are twelve years old which among them is the
marriageable age their parents or guardians take them home with great
expressions of gratitude to the professors and seldom without tears of
the young lady and her companions

in the nurseries of females of the meaner sort the children are
instructed in all kinds of works proper for their sex and their several
degrees those intended for apprentices are dismissed at seven years old
the rest are kept to eleven

the meaner families who have children at these nurseries are obliged
besides their annual pension which is as low as possible to return to
the steward of the nursery a small monthly share of their gettings to be
a portion for the child and therefore all parents are limited in their
expenses by the law  for the lilliputians think nothing can be more
unjust than for people in subservience to their own appetites to bring
children into the world and leave the burthen of supporting them on the
public  as to persons of quality they give security to appropriate a
certain sum for each child suitable to their condition and these funds
are always managed with good husbandry and the most exact justice

the cottagers and labourers keep their children at home their business
being only to till and cultivate the earth and therefore their education
is of little consequence to the public but the old and diseased among
them are supported by hospitals for begging is a trade unknown in this
empire

and here it may perhaps divert the curious reader to give some account
of my domestics and my manner of living in this country during a
residence of nine months and thirteen days  having a head mechanically
turned and being likewise forced by necessity i had made for myself a
table and chair convenient enough out of the largest trees in the royal
park  two hundred sempstresses were employed to make me shirts and
linen for my bed and table all of the strongest and coarsest kind they
could get which however they were forced to quilt together in several
folds for the thickest was some degrees finer than lawn  their linen is
usually three inches wide and three feet make a piece  the sempstresses
took my measure as i lay on the ground one standing at my neck and
another at my midleg with a strong cord extended that each held by the
end while a third measured the length of the cord with a rule of an inch
long  then they measured my right thumb and desired no more for by a
mathematical computation that twice round the thumb is once round the
wrist and so on to the neck and the waist and by the help of my old
shirt which i displayed on the ground before them for a pattern they
fitted me exactly  three hundred tailors were employed in the same
manner to make me clothes but they had another contrivance for taking my
measure  i kneeled down and they raised a ladder from the ground to my
neck upon this ladder one of them mounted and let fall a plumbline
from my collar to the floor which just answered the length of my coat
but my waist and arms i measured myself  when my clothes were finished
which was done in my house for the largest of theirs would not have been
able to hold them they looked like the patchwork made by the ladies in
england only that mine were all of a colour

i had three hundred cooks to dress my victuals in little convenient huts
built about my house where they and their families lived and prepared
me two dishes apiece  i took up twenty waiters in my hand and placed
them on the table a hundred more attended below on the ground some with
dishes of meat and some with barrels of wine and other liquors slung on
their shoulders all which the waiters above drew up as i wanted in a
very ingenious manner by certain cords as we draw the bucket up a well
in europe  a dish of their meat was a good mouthful and a barrel of
their liquor a reasonable draught  their mutton yields to ours but
their beef is excellent  i have had a sirloin so large that i have been
forced to make three bites of it but this is rare  my servants were
astonished to see me eat it bones and all as in our country we do the
leg of a lark  their geese and turkeys i usually ate at a mouthful and
i confess they far exceed ours  of their smaller fowl i could take up
twenty or thirty at the end of my knife

one day his imperial majesty being informed of my way of living desired
that himself and his royal consort with the young princes of the blood
of both sexes might have the happiness as he was pleased to call it
of dining with me  they came accordingly and i placed them in chairs
of state upon my table just over against me with their guards about
them  flimnap the lord high treasurer attended there likewise with his
white staff and i observed he often looked on me with a sour
countenance which i would not seem to regard but ate more than usual
in honour to my dear country as well as to fill the court with
admiration  i have some private reasons to believe that this visit from
his majesty gave flimnap an opportunity of doing me ill offices to his
master  that minister had always been my secret enemy though he
outwardly caressed me more than was usual to the moroseness of his
nature  he represented to the emperor the low condition of his
treasury that he was forced to take up money at a great discount that
exchequer bills would not circulate under nine per cent below par that
i had cost his majesty above a million and a half of sprugs their
greatest gold coin about the bigness of a spangle and upon the whole
that it would be advisable in the emperor to take the first fair occasion
of dismissing me

i am here obliged to vindicate the reputation of an excellent lady who
was an innocent sufferer upon my account  the treasurer took a fancy to
be jealous of his wife from the malice of some evil tongues who
informed him that her grace had taken a violent affection for my person
and the court scandal ran for some time that she once came privately to
my lodging  this i solemnly declare to be a most infamous falsehood
without any grounds further than that her grace was pleased to treat me
with all innocent marks of freedom and friendship  i own she came often
to my house but always publicly nor ever without three more in the
coach who were usually her sister and young daughter and some
particular acquaintance but this was common to many other ladies of the
court  and i still appeal to my servants round whether they at any time
saw a coach at my door without knowing what persons were in it  on
those occasions when a servant had given me notice my custom was to go
immediately to the door and after paying my respects to take up the
coach and two horses very carefully in my hands for if there were six
horses the postillion always unharnessed four and place them on a
table where i had fixed a movable rim quite round of five inches high
to prevent accidents  and i have often had four coaches and horses at
once on my table full of company while i sat in my chair leaning my
face towards them and when i was engaged with one set the coachmen
would gently drive the others round my table  i have passed many an
afternoon very agreeably in these conversations  but i defy the
treasurer or his two informers i will name them and let them make the
best of it clustril and drunlo to prove that any person ever came to me
incognito except the secretary reldresal who was sent by express
command of his imperial majesty as i have before related  i should not
have dwelt so long upon this particular if it had not been a point
wherein the reputation of a great lady is so nearly concerned to say
nothing of my own though i then had the honour to be a nardac which
the treasurer himself is not for all the world knows that he is only a
glumglum a title inferior by one degree as that of a marquis is to a
duke in england yet i allow he preceded me in right of his post  these
false informations which i afterwards came to the knowledge of by an
accident not proper to mention made the treasurer show his lady for some
time an ill countenance and me a worse and although he was at last
undeceived and reconciled to her yet i lost all credit with him and
found my interest decline very fast with the emperor himself who was
indeed too much governed by that favourite



chapter vii


the author being informed of a design to accuse him of hightreason
makes his escape to blefuscu  his reception there

before i proceed to give an account of my leaving this kingdom it may be
proper to inform the reader of a private intrigue which had been for two
months forming against me

i had been hitherto all my life a stranger to courts for which i was
unqualified by the meanness of my condition  i had indeed heard and read
enough of the dispositions of great princes and ministers but never
expected to have found such terrible effects of them in so remote a
country governed as i thought by very different maxims from those in
europe

when i was just preparing to pay my attendance on the emperor of
blefuscu a considerable person at court to whom i had been very
serviceable at a time when he lay under the highest displeasure of his
imperial majesty came to my house very privately at night in a close
chair and without sending his name desired admittance  the chairmen
were dismissed i put the chair with his lordship in it into my
coatpocket and giving orders to a trusty servant to say i was
indisposed and gone to sleep i fastened the door of my house placed the
chair on the table according to my usual custom and sat down by it
after the common salutations were over observing his lordships
countenance full of concern and inquiring into the reason he desired i
would hear him with patience in a matter that highly concerned my honour
and my life  his speech was to the following effect for i took notes
of it as soon as he left me—

you are to know said he that several committees of council have been
lately called in the most private manner on your account and it is but
two days since his majesty came to a full resolution

you are very sensible that skyresh bolgolam galbet or highadmiral
has been your mortal enemy almost ever since your arrival  his
original reasons i know not but his hatred is increased since your great
success against blefuscu by which his glory as admiral is much obscured
this lord in conjunction with flimnap the hightreasurer whose enmity
against you is notorious on account of his lady limtoc the general
lalcon the chamberlain and balmuff the grand justiciary have prepared
articles of impeachment against you for treason and other capital
crimes

this preface made me so impatient being conscious of my own merits and
innocence that i was going to interrupt him when he entreated me to be
silent and thus proceeded—

out of gratitude for the favours you have done me i procured
information of the whole proceedings and a copy of the articles wherein
i venture my head for your service

    articles of impeachment against quinbus flestrin the
    manmountain

    article i

    whereas by a statute made in the reign of his imperial majesty
    calin deffar plune it is enacted that whoever shall make water
    within the precincts of the royal palace shall be liable to the
    pains and penalties of hightreason notwithstanding the said
    quinbus flestrin in open breach of the said law under colour of
    extinguishing the fire kindled in the apartment of his majestys most
    dear imperial consort did maliciously traitorously and devilishly
    by discharge of his urine put out the said fire kindled in the said
    apartment lying and being within the precincts of the said royal
    palace against the statute in that case provided etc against the
    duty etc

    article ii

    that the said quinbus flestrin having brought the imperial fleet
    of blefuscu into the royal port and being afterwards commanded by
    his imperial majesty to seize all the other ships of the said empire
    of blefuscu and reduce that empire to a province to be governed by
    a viceroy from hence and to destroy and put to death not only all
    the bigendian exiles but likewise all the people of that empire who
    would not immediately forsake the bigendian heresy he the said
    flestrin like a false traitor against his most auspicious serene
    imperial majesty did petition to be excused from the said service
    upon pretence of unwillingness to force the consciences or destroy
    the liberties and lives of an innocent people

    article iii

    that whereas certain ambassadors arrived from the court of
    blefuscu to sue for peace in his majestys court he the said
    flestrin did like a false traitor aid abet comfort and divert
    the said ambassadors although he knew them to be servants to a
    prince who was lately an open enemy to his imperial majesty and in
    an open war against his said majesty

    article iv

    that the said quinbus flestrin contrary to the duty of a faithful
    subject is now preparing to make a voyage to the court and empire of
    blefuscu for which he has received only verbal license from his
    imperial majesty and under colour of the said license does falsely
    and traitorously intend to take the said voyage and thereby to aid
    comfort and abet the emperor of blefuscu so lately an enemy and in
    open war with his imperial majesty aforesaid

there are some other articles but these are the most important of
which i have read you an abstract

in the several debates upon this impeachment it must be confessed that
his majesty gave many marks of his great lenity often urging the
services you had done him and endeavouring to extenuate your crimes
the treasurer and admiral insisted that you should be put to the most
painful and ignominious death by setting fire to your house at night
and the general was to attend with twenty thousand men armed with
poisoned arrows to shoot you on the face and hands  some of your
servants were to have private orders to strew a poisonous juice on your
shirts and sheets which would soon make you tear your own flesh and die
in the utmost torture  the general came into the same opinion so that
for a long time there was a majority against you but his majesty
resolving if possible to spare your life at last brought off the
chamberlain

upon this incident reldresal principal secretary for private affairs
who always approved himself your true friend was commanded by the
emperor to deliver his opinion which he accordingly did and therein
justified the good thoughts you have of him  he allowed your crimes to
be great but that still there was room for mercy the most commendable
virtue in a prince and for which his majesty was so justly celebrated
he said the friendship between you and him was so well known to the
world that perhaps the most honourable board might think him partial
however in obedience to the command he had received he would freely
offer his sentiments  that if his majesty in consideration of your
services and pursuant to his own merciful disposition would please to
spare your life and only give orders to put out both your eyes he
humbly conceived that by this expedient justice might in some measure be
satisfied and all the world would applaud the lenity of the emperor as
well as the fair and generous proceedings of those who have the honour to
be his counsellors  that the loss of your eyes would be no impediment to
your bodily strength by which you might still be useful to his majesty
that blindness is an addition to courage by concealing dangers from us
that the fear you had for your eyes was the greatest difficulty in
bringing over the enemys fleet and it would be sufficient for you to
see by the eyes of the ministers since the greatest princes do no more

this proposal was received with the utmost disapprobation by the whole
board  bolgolam the admiral could not preserve his temper but rising
up in fury said he wondered how the secretary durst presume to give his
opinion for preserving the life of a traitor that the services you had
performed were by all true reasons of state the great aggravation of
your crimes that you who were able to extinguish the fire by discharge
of urine in her majestys apartment which he mentioned with horror
might at another time raise an inundation by the same means to drown
the whole palace and the same strength which enabled you to bring over
the enemys fleet might serve upon the first discontent to carry it
back that he had good reasons to think you were a bigendian in your
heart and as treason begins in the heart before it appears in
overtacts so he accused you as a traitor on that account and therefore
insisted you should be put to death

the treasurer was of the same opinion he showed to what straits his
majestys revenue was reduced by the charge of maintaining you which
would soon grow insupportable that the secretarys expedient of putting
out your eyes was so far from being a remedy against this evil that it
would probably increase it as is manifest from the common practice of
blinding some kind of fowls after which they fed the faster and grew
sooner fat that his sacred majesty and the council who are your judges
were in their own consciences fully convinced of your guilt which was
a sufficient argument to condemn you to death without the formal proofs
required by the strict letter of the law

but his imperial majesty fully determined against capital punishment
was graciously pleased to say that since the council thought the loss of
your eyes too easy a censure some other way may be inflicted hereafter
and your friend the secretary humbly desiring to be heard again in
answer to what the treasurer had objected concerning the great charge
his majesty was at in maintaining you said that his excellency who had
the sole disposal of the emperors revenue might easily provide against
that evil by gradually lessening your establishment by which for want
of sufficient for you would grow weak and faint and lose your appetite
and consequently decay and consume in a few months neither would the
stench of your carcass be then so dangerous when it should become more
than half diminished and immediately upon your death five or six
thousand of his majestys subjects might in two or three days cut your
flesh from your bones take it away by cartloads and bury it in distant
parts to prevent infection leaving the skeleton as a monument of
admiration to posterity

thus by the great friendship of the secretary the whole affair was
compromised  it was strictly enjoined that the project of starving you
by degrees should be kept a secret but the sentence of putting out your
eyes was entered on the books none dissenting except bolgolam the
admiral who being a creature of the empress was perpetually instigated
by her majesty to insist upon your death she having borne perpetual
malice against you on account of that infamous and illegal method you
took to extinguish the fire in her apartment

in three days your friend the secretary will be directed to come to your
house and read before you the articles of impeachment and then to
signify the great lenity and favour of his majesty and council whereby
you are only condemned to the loss of your eyes which his majesty does
not question you will gratefully and humbly submit to and twenty of his
majestys surgeons will attend in order to see the operation well
performed by discharging very sharppointed arrows into the balls of
your eyes as you lie on the ground

i leave to your prudence what measures you will take and to avoid
suspicion i must immediately return in as private a manner as i came

his lordship did so and i remained alone under many doubts and
perplexities of mind

it was a custom introduced by this prince and his ministry very
different as i have been assured from the practice of former times
that after the court had decreed any cruel execution either to gratify
the monarchs resentment or the malice of a favourite the emperor
always made a speech to his whole council expressing his great lenity
and tenderness as qualities known and confessed by all the world  this
speech was immediately published throughout the kingdom nor did any
thing terrify the people so much as those encomiums on his majestys
mercy because it was observed that the more these praises were enlarged
and insisted on the more inhuman was the punishment and the sufferer
more innocent  yet as to myself i must confess having never been
designed for a courtier either by my birth or education i was so ill a
judge of things that i could not discover the lenity and favour of this
sentence but conceived it perhaps erroneously rather to be rigorous
than gentle  i sometimes thought of standing my trial for although i
could not deny the facts alleged in the several articles yet i hoped
they would admit of some extenuation  but having in my life perused many
statetrials which i ever observed to terminate as the judges thought
fit to direct i durst not rely on so dangerous a decision in so
critical a juncture and against such powerful enemies  once i was
strongly bent upon resistance for while i had liberty the whole
strength of that empire could hardly subdue me and i might easily with
stones pelt the metropolis to pieces but i soon rejected that project
with horror by remembering the oath i had made to the emperor the
favours i received from him and the high title of nardac he conferred
upon me  neither had i so soon learned the gratitude of courtiers to
persuade myself that his majestys present seventies acquitted me of all
past obligations

at last i fixed upon a resolution for which it is probable i may incur
some censure and not unjustly for i confess i owe the preserving of
mine eyes and consequently my liberty to my own great rashness and want
of experience because if i had then known the nature of princes and
ministers which i have since observed in many other courts and their
methods of treating criminals less obnoxious than myself i should with
great alacrity and readiness have submitted to so easy a punishment
but hurried on by the precipitancy of youth and having his imperial
majestys license to pay my attendance upon the emperor of blefuscu i
took this opportunity before the three days were elapsed to send a
letter to my friend the secretary signifying my resolution of setting
out that morning for blefuscu pursuant to the leave i had got and
without waiting for an answer i went to that side of the island where
our fleet lay  i seized a large man of war tied a cable to the prow
and lifting up the anchors i stripped myself put my clothes together
with my coverlet which i carried under my arm into the vessel and
drawing it after me between wading and swimming arrived at the royal
port of blefuscu where the people had long expected me they lent me two
guides to direct me to the capital city which is of the same name  i
held them in my hands till i came within two hundred yards of the gate
and desired them to signify my arrival to one of the secretaries and
let him know i there waited his majestys command  i had an answer in
about an hour that his majesty attended by the royal family and great
officers of the court was coming out to receive me  i advanced a
hundred yards  the emperor and his train alighted from their horses the
empress and ladies from their coaches and i did not perceive they were
in any fright or concern  i lay on the ground to kiss his majestys and
the empresss hands  i told his majesty that i was come according to
my promise and with the license of the emperor my master to have the
honour of seeing so mighty a monarch and to offer him any service in my
power consistent with my duty to my own prince not mentioning a word
of my disgrace because i had hitherto no regular information of it and
might suppose myself wholly ignorant of any such design neither could i
reasonably conceive that the emperor would discover the secret while i
was out of his power wherein however it soon appeared i was deceived

i shall not trouble the reader with the particular account of my
reception at this court which was suitable to the generosity of so great
a prince nor of the difficulties i was in for want of a house and bed
being forced to lie on the ground wrapped up in my coverlet



chapter viii


the author by a lucky accident finds means to leave blefuscu and
after some difficulties returns safe to his native country

three days after my arrival walking out of curiosity to the northeast
coast of the island i observed about half a league off in the sea
somewhat that looked like a boat overturned  i pulled off my shoes and
stockings and wailing two or three hundred yards i found the object to
approach nearer by force of the tide and then plainly saw it to be a
real boat which i supposed might by some tempest have been driven from a
ship  whereupon i returned immediately towards the city and desired
his imperial majesty to lend me twenty of the tallest vessels he had
left after the loss of his fleet and three thousand seamen under the
command of his viceadmiral  this fleet sailed round while i went back
the shortest way to the coast where i first discovered the boat  i
found the tide had driven it still nearer  the seamen were all provided
with cordage which i had beforehand twisted to a sufficient strength
when the ships came up i stripped myself and waded till i came within a
hundred yards off the boat after which i was forced to swim till i got
up to it  the seamen threw me the end of the cord which i fastened to a
hole in the forepart of the boat and the other end to a man of war but
i found all my labour to little purpose for being out of my depth i
was not able to work  in this necessity i was forced to swim behind and
push the boat forward as often as i could with one of my hands and the
tide favouring me i advanced so far that i could just hold up my chin
and feel the ground  i rested two or three minutes and then gave the
boat another shove and so on till the sea was no higher than my
armpits and now the most laborious part being over i took out my
other cables which were stowed in one of the ships and fastened them
first to the boat and then to nine of the vessels which attended me the
wind being favourable the seamen towed and i shoved until we arrived
within forty yards of the shore and waiting till the tide was out i
got dry to the boat and by the assistance of two thousand men with
ropes and engines i made a shift to turn it on its bottom and found it
was but little damaged

i shall not trouble the reader with the difficulties i was under by the
help of certain paddles which cost me ten days making to get my boat to
the royal port of blefuscu where a mighty concourse of people appeared
upon my arrival full of wonder at the sight of so prodigious a vessel
i told the emperor that my good fortune had thrown this boat in my way
to carry me to some place whence i might return into my native country
and begged his majestys orders for getting materials to fit it up
together with his license to depart which after some kind
expostulations he was pleased to grant

i did very much wonder in all this time not to have heard of any
express relating to me from our emperor to the court of blefuscu  but i
was afterward given privately to understand that his imperial majesty
never imagining i had the least notice of his designs believed i was
only gone to blefuscu in performance of my promise according to the
license he had given me which was well known at our court and would
return in a few days when the ceremony was ended  but he was at last in
pain at my long absence and after consulting with the treasurer and the
rest of that cabal a person of quality was dispatched with the copy of
the articles against me  this envoy had instructions to represent to the
monarch of blefuscu the great lenity of his master who was content to
punish me no farther than with the loss of mine eyes that i had fled
from justice and if i did not return in two hours i should be deprived
of my title of nardac and declared a traitor  the envoy further
added that in order to maintain the peace and amity between both
empires his master expected that his brother of blefuscu would give
orders to have me sent back to lilliput bound hand and foot to be
punished as a traitor

the emperor of blefuscu having taken three days to consult returned an
answer consisting of many civilities and excuses  he said that as for
sending me bound his brother knew it was impossible that although i
had deprived him of his fleet yet he owed great obligations to me for
many good offices i had done him in making the peace  that however
both their majesties would soon be made easy for i had found a
prodigious vessel on the shore able to carry me on the sea which he had
given orders to fit up with my own assistance and direction and he
hoped in a few weeks both empires would be freed from so insupportable
an encumbrance

with this answer the envoy returned to lilliput and the monarch of
blefuscu related to me all that had passed offering me at the same time
but under the strictest confidence his gracious protection if i would
continue in his service wherein although i believed him sincere yet i
resolved never more to put any confidence in princes or ministers where
i could possibly avoid it and therefore with all due acknowledgments
for his favourable intentions i humbly begged to be excused  i told
him that since fortune whether good or evil had thrown a vessel in my
way i was resolved to venture myself on the ocean rather than be an
occasion of difference between two such mighty monarchs  neither did i
find the emperor at all displeased and i discovered by a certain
accident that he was very glad of my resolution and so were most of his
ministers

these considerations moved me to hasten my departure somewhat sooner than
i intended to which the court impatient to have me gone very readily
contributed  five hundred workmen were employed to make two sails to my
boat according to my directions by quilting thirteen folds of their
strongest linen together  i was at the pains of making ropes and cables
by twisting ten twenty or thirty of the thickest and strongest of
theirs  a great stone that i happened to find after a long search by
the seashore served me for an anchor  i had the tallow of three
hundred cows for greasing my boat and other uses  i was at incredible
pains in cutting down some of the largest timbertrees for oars and
masts wherein i was however much assisted by his majestys
shipcarpenters who helped me in smoothing them after i had done the
rough work

in about a month when all was prepared i sent to receive his majestys
commands and to take my leave  the emperor and royal family came out of
the palace i lay down on my face to kiss his hand which he very
graciously gave me so did the empress and young princes of the blood
his majesty presented me with fifty purses of two hundred sprugs
apiece together with his picture at full length which i put
immediately into one of my gloves to keep it from being hurt  the
ceremonies at my departure were too many to trouble the reader with at
this time

i stored the boat with the carcases of a hundred oxen and three hundred
sheep with bread and drink proportionable and as much meat ready
dressed as four hundred cooks could provide  i took with me six cows and
two bulls alive with as many ewes and rams intending to carry them into
my own country and propagate the breed  and to feed them on board i
had a good bundle of hay and a bag of corn  i would gladly have taken a
dozen of the natives but this was a thing the emperor would by no means
permit and besides a diligent search into my pockets his majesty
engaged my honour not to carry away any of his subjects although with
their own consent and desire

having thus prepared all things as well as i was able i set sail on the
twentyfourth day of september 1701 at six in the morning and when i
had gone about fourleagues to the northward the wind being at
southeast at six in the evening i descried a small island about half a
league to the northwest  i advanced forward and cast anchor on the
leeside of the island which seemed to be uninhabited  i then took some
refreshment and went to my rest  i slept well and as i conjectured at
least six hours for i found the day broke in two hours after i awaked
it was a clear night  i ate my breakfast before the sun was up and
heaving anchor the wind being favourable i steered the same course that
i had done the day before wherein i was directed by my pocket compass
my intention was to reach if possible one of those islands which i had
reason to believe lay to the northeast of van diemens land  i
discovered nothing all that day but upon the next about three in the
afternoon when i had by my computation made twentyfour leagues from
blefuscu i descried a sail steering to the southeast my course was due
east  i hailed her but could get no answer yet i found i gained upon
her for the wind slackened  i made all the sail i could and in half an
hour she spied me then hung out her ancient and discharged a gun  it
is not easy to express the joy i was in upon the unexpected hope of once
more seeing my beloved country and the dear pledges i left in it  the
ship slackened her sails and i came up with her between five and six in
the evening september 26th but my heart leaped within me to see her
english colours  i put my cows and sheep into my coatpockets and got
on board with all my little cargo of provisions  the vessel was an
english merchantman returning from japan by the north and south seas
the captain mr john biddel of deptford a very civil man and an
excellent sailor

we were now in the latitude of 30 degrees south there were about fifty
men in the ship and here i met an old comrade of mine one peter
williams who gave me a good character to the captain  this gentleman
treated me with kindness and desired i would let him know what place i
came from last and whither i was bound which i did in a few words but
he thought i was raving and that the dangers i underwent had disturbed
my head whereupon i took my black cattle and sheep out of my pocket
which after great astonishment clearly convinced him of my veracity  i
then showed him the gold given me by the emperor of blefuscu together
with his majestys picture at full length and some other rarities of
that country  i gave him two purses of two hundreds sprugs each and
promised when we arrived in england to make him a present of a cow and
a sheep big with young

i shall not trouble the reader with a particular account of this voyage
which was very prosperous for the most part  we arrived in the downs on
the 13th of april 1702  i had only one misfortune that the rats on
board carried away one of my sheep i found her bones in a hole picked
clean from the flesh  the rest of my cattle i got safe ashore and set
them agrazing in a bowlinggreen at greenwich where the fineness of the
grass made them feed very heartily though i had always feared the
contrary neither could i possibly have preserved them in so long a
voyage if the captain had not allowed me some of his best biscuit
which rubbed to powder and mingled with water was their constant food
the short time i continued in england i made a considerable profit by
showing my cattle to many persons of quality and others and before i
began my second voyage i sold them for six hundred pounds  since my
last return i find the breed is considerably increased especially the
sheep which i hope will prove much to the advantage of the woollen
manufacture by the fineness of the fleeces

i stayed but two months with my wife and family for my insatiable desire
of seeing foreign countries would suffer me to continue no longer  i
left fifteen hundred pounds with my wife and fixed her in a good house
at redriff  my remaining stock i carried with me part in money and part
in goods in hopes to improve my fortunes  my eldest uncle john had left
me an estate in land near epping of about thirty pounds ayear and i
had a long lease of the black bull in fetterlane which yielded me as
much more so that i was not in any danger of leaving my family upon the
parish  my son johnny named so after his uncle was at the
grammarschool and a towardly child  my daughter betty who is now well
married and has children was then at her needlework  i took leave of
my wife and boy and girl with tears on both sides and went on board
the adventure a merchant ship of three hundred tons bound for surat
captain john nicholas of liverpool commander  but my account of this
voyage must be referred to the second part of my travels
